--- PAGE 1 ---
INSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA
EXAMINATIONS
rd
03 November 2015
Subject SA1 – Health and Care Insurance
Time allowed: Three hours (14.45* - 18.00 Hrs)
Total Marks: 100
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES
1. Please read the instructions on the front page of answer booklet and
instructions to examinees sent along with hall ticket carefully and follow
without exception.
2. * You have 15 minutes at the start of the examination in which you are
required to read the questions. You are strongly encouraged to use this
time for reading only, but notes may be made. You then have three hours
to complete the paper.
3. You must not start writing your answers in the answer sheet until
instructed to do so by the supervisor.
4. The answers are expected to be India Specific application for the
syllabus and corresponding core reading. However, substantially the core
reading material is still taken from material supplied by Actuarial
Education Company which are meant for UK Fellowship examination.
The core reading also contains some material which is India Specific,
mostly the IRDA regulation. In view of this, it should be noted that focal
point of answers is expected to be India Specific application. However, if
application specific to any other country is quoted in the answer the
candidate should answer the question with reference to Indian
environment.
5. Attempt all questions, beginning your answer to each question on a
separate sheet.
6. Mark allocations are shown in brackets.
7. Please check if you have received complete Question Paper and no page
is missing. If so, kindly get new set of Question Paper from the
Invigilator.
AT THE END OF THE EXAMINATION
Please return your answer book and this question paper to the supervisor separately.

--- PAGE 2 ---
IAI SA1- 1015
Q. 1) Your Company has been doing Health Insurance business in India for more than eight
years. It is active both in Retail and Group Business. You work as Product Actuary in
the Company. Company plans to come up with a Health Indemnity insurance product
which aims to provide both domestic and international coverage.
i) Explain the factors that you need to consider while designing the international
coverage. (5)
ii) Explain the challenges associated with Global coverage proposition? (6)
iii) Discuss the ways to address some or all of the challenges? (6)
iv) Explain the fundamental difference that is expected between the proposed global
coverage and a standard travel insurance product, in terms of:
a) Product features (2)
b) Premium rating structure (2)
v) Discuss the pricing related issues with respect to following points:
a) Data analysis approach to ascertain the risk premium estimate for the
domestic hospitalization coverage component of the proposed product. (4)
b) Additional points related to maturity of the existing hospitalization product(s)
that need to be considered while referring to existing product’s experience. (4)
c) The steps to derive the risk premium of the Global coverage component. (6)
[35]
Q. 2) Assume that Government of India has constituted a high level committee to explore
the possibilities of offering a Universal Health Insurance Scheme to Indian Citizens.
Your views have been invited with respect to the following:
i) What are the five most important aspects that are pre-conditions for the success
of this product? While answering this question, you need to clearly describe why
you feel a particular aspect is important to have a place in top five and also bring
out the inter-relation between these aspects. (10)
ii) How product pricing, underwriting and pre-existing coverage are related to each
other and what are the important aspects that are to be taken care of while
achieving trade-off between all the three. (5)
iii) What are the five most important things that Government can do from her side to
make this product a success? Your answer should include reasons why you feel a
particular action by Government will lead to success of the product and also
bring out relation with the points you have covered in answering other parts of
this question. (10)
[25]
Page 2 of 3

--- PAGE 3 ---
IAI SA1- 1015
Q. 3) ABC Standalone Health Insurance Company Ltd. is active in Indian market from last
seven years. It offers almost all health insurance products falling in both retail and
group portfolio and enjoys the reputation of being the most preferred health insurance
brand. ABC utilizes large number of third party services to manage its business. The
Company has started facing brand issues with respect to its latest brand campaign
covering its flagship product. The underlying product contains customized wellness
component which also involves drug procurement under reduced rate if purchased
from XYZ Pharmacies (a newly launched medical store chain in Tier 1 cities only).
i) Why branding is important for Health Insurance company? What important
aspects need to be considered by the company while developing an insurance
product in-line with its branding strategy? (6)
ii) What all issues could have resulted from the Company’s recent brand campaign? (5)
iii) ABC Company is contemplating the option to utilize digital media to promote
their insurance products.
a) What digital marketing consists of? (1)
b) What are the advantages and dis-advantages of offering and promoting health
insurance products via digital media? (6)
iv) A Senior Management Committee (including Appointed Actuary) has been
formed to develop a plan to take digital marketing ahead. What all initial points
could be considered by the committee to decide on next steps in this context? (6)
v) The Chief Distribution Officer suggested developing an insurance product that
would only be marketed via digital media. The CEO of the company liked this
suggestion and asked Appointed Actuary to share his view on the underlying
risks associated with the same.
List down the key risks associated with the proposal. (6)
vi) The CFO has requested you to prepare a note on the financial viability of the
proposition for setting up the digital media channel. Please explain your
approach to determine the financial viability. (10)
[40]
************************
Page 3 of 3

