1 
Company B is a health and care insurance company that has written Private Medical 
Insurance (PMI) business for many years in Country Y. Company B calculates its 
statutory reserves on a Solvency Il basis. 
The marketing director of Company B has proposed introducing a new annual health 
check option for its PMI business. The health check is a 30-minute in person 
appointment with a healthcare professional and involves a range of health tests and 
questions. Policyholders who take the annual health check option will also be given a 
wearable electronic device that will record data about the policyholder such as daily 
step counts, heart rate, calories burned and weight. The policyholder will be able to 
upload the data from their electronic device to their smartphone or computer to 
monitor their health. The information collected by the policyholder's wearable device 
will be shared with Company B. 
Policyholders who take up the health check option and use their wearable electronic 
device will receive a discount on their PMI premiums. The policyholder's premium 
would not be directly affected by the health data provided from the health checks. 
There will be no charge to the policyholder for the annual health check, but there will 
be a small upfront charge to cover the cost of the wearable device. 
The marketing director believes that the introduction of annual health checks and 
wearable electronic devices will lead to better health outcomes for the policyholder as 
it will encourage policyholders to lead a healthier lifestyle. The marketing director 
believes that Company B will also benefit from healthier policyholders. 
(i)  
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the marketing director's proposal 
for: 
(a) 
Company B. 
(b) 
policyholders. 
The chief actuary of Company B has asked about the potential impact of introducing 
the annual health check on Company B 's statutory reserving assumptions for its PMI 
business. 
(ii) 
Discuss the impact of introducing the annual health check on the valuation 
assumptions for Company B 's Solvency Il Best Estimate Liabilities for its 
 
PMI business. 
[10] 
Company B has been approached by an external third-party company that has offered 
to carry out the annual health assessments and collect and monitor the data from the 
wearable devices. The third-party company has carried out similar services in another 
country and is currently setting up a number of medical centres in Country Y. The 
annual health assessment will be carried out in person at one of the third-party 
company's medical centres in Country Y. 


--- PAGE 3 ---
SAI S2025-3 
(iii) 
Outline the factors Company B should consider in deciding whether to use the 
third-party company. [10] Company B agreed to implement the health check 
option and outsourced the administration of the health check option to the 
third-party company. Three years after the health check option was added the 
management of Company B carried out an analysis of the experience of PMI 
business since the health check option was added. The management of 
Company B are pleased with the take up of the option, and the level of new 
business sales. However new business profitability for its PMI business has 
been significantly lower than expectations. The finance director of Company B 
has proposed that Company B should introduce an annual charge for the health 
check for both existing and new business. 
(iv) 
Discuss the finance director's proposal. 
[8] 
[Total 38]


--- PAGE 4 ---
SAI S2025-4 
2 
Country A has a small private Long Term Care (LTC) insurance market that has been 
slow to develop over the past 15 years. Country A has an aging population and a 
publicly funded health system with no private provision of healthcare services. Access 
to government funded long term care is means-tested. The majority, 75% of the adult 
population in Country A, self-fund their long term care needs. 
Country B has private provision of both healthcare and long term care services, with 
no public provision of these services. Private LTC insurance was launched in Country 
B 15 years ago, and since then the market has grown and is now well established with 
75% of the adult population purchasing some level of private LTC insurance cover. (i)
 
Describe the main product features of pre-funded LTC insurance. [4] 
(ii) 
Contrast the main product features of immediate needs LTC insurance to those 
shown in part (i) above. 
[3] 
(iii) 
Describe possible reasons why the LTC insurance market may be more 
developed in Country B than Country A. 
[10] 
The government of Country A is concerned that its aging population will mean more 
of its citizens will have insufficient funds to meet the costs of long-term care and that 
an increasing proportion of the population will require financial support from the 
government to meet the cost of their long term care. The government of Country A is 
therefore considering encouraging insurance companies based outside of Country A to 
sell LTC insurance in Country A. 
Company XYZ is the market leading health and care insurance company for LTC 
insurance in Country B. The government of Country A has asked several health and 
care insurance companies based outside of Country A, including Company XYZ, to 
start selling LTC insurance in Country A. Company XYZ's main LTC product 
provides benefits on an indemnity basis in return for annual premiums payable until 
care is required. Company XYZ is considering if it will start writing pre-funded LTC 
insurance in Country A. 
(iv) 
Suggest possible reasons why Company XYZ should start selling pre-funded 
 
LTC business in Country A. 
[6] 
(v) 
Discuss the factors Company XYZ should consider in determining if it is 
appropriate to price LTC business sold in Country A using the same pricing 
basis as is used for LTC business in Country B. 
[12] [Total 35] 
3 
Company A is a large health and care insurance company in Country Z. Company A 
specialises in, and sells large volumes of, individual Critical Illness (CI) business. 
(i) 
Define the term 'asset share'. [2] 
Company A has recently reviewed its existing business and found that longer duration 
policies (i.e. policies that have been in force for 10 years or more) written on 
guaranteed premium terms, have an asset share that is greater than expected. 


--- PAGE 5 ---
SAI S2025-5 
(ii) 
Discuss why the asset share may be greater than expected on longer duration 
policies. 
[8] 
The economy in Country Z has been in recession for the last 5 years. This economic 
environment has placed downward pressure on premiums across all health and care 
insurance products. Reviewable premiums have replaced guaranteed premiums as the 
industry norm for new CI business sold in Country Z. 
(iii) 
Explain why insurance companies may have adopted reviewable premiums for 
new CI business sold in Country Z. [5] 
Recently, Company A has made the following changes: 
• new CI business will be written exclusively on a reviewable premium basis  the 
investment strategy for the assets backing CI business has been updated. (iv)
 
Justify why Company A has updated its investment strategy. 
[5] 
The chief investment officer of Company A has asked for additional resources to carry 
out the work to implement the updated investment strategy. 
(v)  
Outline the tasks Company A will need to undertake as part of implementing 
the updated investment strategy. 
[7] 
[Total 27] 
END OF PAPER