--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 SA1: Study Guide
1.2 Subject SA1 – Syllabus and Core Reading
Syllabus
The Syllabusfor Subject SA1 is given here. To the right of each objective are the chapter numbers
in which the objective is covered in the ActEd course.
Aim
Apply the main principles that are relevant to the provision of health and care benefits to complex
scenarios concerning the management of health and care insurance companies, taking into
account relevant regulatory, legislative and professional requirements, and the business
environment in which the health and care business is sold.
Topics and topic weightings
1. Health insurance products and general business environment (30%)
2. Regulatory, legislative and taxation environment (10%)
3. Rating, pricing and underwriting (20%)
4. Valuation, asset-liability management (ALM) and reinsurance (20%)
5. Monitoring and strategy (20%)
The topic weighting percentage noted alongside the topics is indicative of the volume of content
of a topic within the subject and therefore broadly aligned to the volume of marks allocated to
this topic in the examination. For example, if a topic is 20% of the subject then you can expect
that approximately 20% of the total marks available in the examination paper will be available on
that topic.
Candidates will be expected to be able to apply knowledge and skills from across the syllabus
topics to scenarios and questions proposed by the examiners and produce coherent solutions and
actions, including:
· Analysis of complex problems in terms of actuarial, economic and financial factors to a
level where appropriate analytical techniques may be used.
· Assess the implications and relevance of such factors, integrating the results into a
coherent whole.
· Evaluate the results critically in a wider context, drawing appropriate conclusions.
· Propose solutions and actions, or a range of possible solutions and actions, based on this
evaluation.
Candidates should ensure that they are well prepared across the entire syllabus and have an
understanding of the principal terms used in general health and care.
© IFE: 2024 Examinations The Actuarial Education Company

