INSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA  
 
EXAMINATIONS  
 
15th November  2010  
 
Subject SA 1 — Health and Care Insurance  
  
Time allowed: Three hours (9.45* - 13.00 Hours)  
Total Marks: 100  
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES  
 
1. Please read the instructions on the front page of  answer booklet and instructions 
to examinees sent along with hall ticket carefully and follow without exception  
 
2. * You have 15 minutes at the start of the examination in which to read the 
questions. You are strongly encouraged to use this time for reading  only, but 
notes may be made. You then have three hours to complete the paper.  
 
3. You must not start writing your answers in the answer sheet until instructed to do 
so by the supervisor  
 
4. The answers are expected to be India Specific application for the sylla bus and 
corresponding core reading. However, substantially the core reading material is 
still taken from material supplied by Actuarial Education Company which are 
meant for UK Fellowship examination. The core reading also contains some 
material which is I ndia Specific, mostly the IRDA regulation. In view of this, it 
should be noted that focal point of answers is expected to be India Specific 
application. However if application specific to any other country is quoted in the 
answer the same should answer the  question with reference to Indian 
environment.  
 
5. Attempt all questions, beginning your answer to each question on a separate 
sheet.  
 
6. Mark allocations are shown in brackets.  
AT THE END OF THE EXAMINATION  
Please return your answer book and this question pape r to the supervisor separately.  
IAI                                                                                                                       SA1 - 1110  
Page 2 of 4 
 Q 1) 1. Health Insurance products are designed to cover certain customer needs. Please name five 
needs health insurance products are covering.  (5) 
    
 2. Please describe how a critical illness product could cover those ne eds. (3) 
    
 3. Name and briefly describe the most common health insurance product categories - besides 
critical illness products.  (8) 
   [16] 
    
Q 2) 1. Explain why Health Insurance is especially exposed to anti -selection.   (2) 
    
 2. An Insurer  decided to increase the premiums for his annual renewable inpatient 
reimbursement health insurance product by 40% due to deteriorating performance. The 
Regulator did approve this already.  What is a key risk the Insurer is going to face?  (2) 
    
 3. Please describe how these risks can adversely affect the performance of this portfolio 
(described under 2.2).  (5) 
    
 4. Due to the deteriorating performance of the product portfolio the Insurer did opt to 
increase the premiums. What other principle option s would he have had to stabilize or 
improve the performance of the portfolio? You may describe measures for new and 
renewal business separate.  (4) 
    
 5. The premium table of the portfolio described under 2.2 looks like the following:   
   
Age Female  Male 
0-35 1000  850 
36-55 1400  1600  
56-65 2800  3000  
65-75 3200  2700  
  
 
 
    
  Based on this information what could likely be an important reason for the experienced 
deteriorating performance? Please mention also what average incident rate you would 
expect for an inpatient product.  (4) 
   [17] 
    
    
    
 
 
IAI                                                                                                                       SA1 - 1110  
Page 3 of 4 
 Q 3) The product development team of a health insurance company discusses the option of 
guaranteeing the premium of its retail reimbursement health product for at least 3 years or 
ideally longer.  
 
 1. Discuss the risks involved related to this potential change and support your arguments 
with examples as far as possible.   (8) 
    
 2. Describe briefly the expected difference in premiums between the guaranteed and annual 
renewable product, and des cribe how to make an estimation of a minimum premium 
difference.   (2) 
    
 3. In terms of market response and pricing, what are the consequences if annual renewable 
and guaranteed products (with same or similar health coverage) are offered at the same 
time in the market?  (2) 
    
 4. The health insurance company came to the conclusion that the new product should have 
annual renewable level premiums (e.g., entry age dependent premiums) with expiry age 
100.  The level premium is based on the currently appl icable annual renewable risk rates.   
  a. After 3 years the insurer requires to increase the entry age dependent premium table 
by 20% due to ongoing medical inflation. How would the existing insured be affected 
– bearing in mind the level premium structure.  (3) 
    
  b. What potential risks would this mean for the insurer?  (2) 
   [17] 
    
Q 4)  Please discuss the notion of “Moral Hazard” as it relates to a Medical policy such as Mediclaim 
which primarily covers the costs associated with hospital inpatient ad missions.  
Specifically:   
    
 1. Provide the definition of “Moral Hazard”.  (2) 
    
 2. Describe how this notion of Moral Hazard applies to medical insurance such as 
Mediclaim.  (3) 
   [5] 
    
Q 5) 1. Please list some of the demographic issues in the UK that might affect health insurers.  (4) 
    
 2. Please discuss the implications of these issues on health insurers.  (2) 
   [6] 
    
Q 6)  Underwriting is an important feature of product design and the effective management of risk.   
    
IAI                                                                                                                       SA1 - 1110  
Page 4 of 4 
  1. List six ways that medical underwriting can be used to manage risk.  (6) 
    
 2. Outline briefly the particular underwriting features of group products in the UK and some 
other areas.    (4) 
    
 3. When underwriting, it is very common to request information such  as the current state of 
health, personal medical history, family medical history, occupation, pastimes and leisure 
activities. What other information might be requested on a proposal form and why?  (2) 
    
 4. List the factors that should be considered i n deciding how to approach underwriting a 
health insurance product.  (5) 
   [17] 
    
Q 7) Capital is needed to issue new products.   
    
 1. Explain why this is the case?  (3) 
    
 2. Explain how the initial capital needs would typically be determined?  (10) 
    
 3. Explain how an insurer’s cost of capital translates into a cost for the policyholder?  (5) 
    
 4. What happens if the company’s supply of capital is exceeded?  (1) 
    
 5. How does a product that leads to poor morbidity “tie up capital”?  (3) 
   [22] 
    
  ************** *******   
    
 
