 
INSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA  
 
EXAMINATIONS 
 
28th May 2012 
 
Subject SA1 – Health and Care Insurance  
 
Time allowed: Three hours (9.45* - 13.00 Hrs) 
 
Total Marks: 100 
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES 
 
1. Please read the instructions on the front page of answer booklet and instructions to 
examinees sent along with hall ticket carefully and follow without exception  
2. * You have 15 minutes at the start of the exam ination in which to read the questions. 
You are strongly encouraged to use this time for reading only, but notes may be 
made. You then have three hours to complete the paper. 
 3. You must not start writing your answers in th e answer sheet until instructed to do so 
by the supervisor 
 4. The answers are expected to be India Specific application for the syllabus and 
corresponding core reading. However, substantially the core reading material is still 
taken from material supplied by Actuarial Education Company which are meant for 
UK Fellowship examination. The core readin g also contains some material which is 
India Specific, mostly the IRDA regulation. In view of this, it should be noted that 
focal point of answers is expected to be India Specific application. However if 
application specific to any other country is quoted in the answer the same should 
answer the question with reference to Indian environment. 
 
5. Attempt all questions, beginning your ans wer to each question on a separate sheet. 
 
6. Mark allocations are shown in brackets. 
7. Please check if you have received complete Question Paper and no page is missing. If 
so, kindly get new set of Question Paper from the Invigilator. 
 
AT THE END OF THE EXAMINATION 
Please return your answer book and this question paper to the supervisor separately. 
 
IAI         SA1- 0512 
 Page 2 of 3   
Q. 1) You are heading the actuarial team in a health insurance company which has a large portfolio of 
well diversified retail customers in an annu ally renewable inpatient indemnity product. You 
have been entrusted with a task to compute “Customer Lifetime Value” for different segments 
of portfolio.  
 
 A) What do you think could be the use of such an exercise? (4)
   
 B) How would you go about completing this exercise? Mention the important steps involved. (10)
   
 C) How does this compare with the Embedded Value concept? (3)
   [17]
   
Q. 2) A General Health Insurance Company in India has a significant market ing strength and large 
portfolio in Motor and Fire and wants to enter into Health Insurance. They feel that the concept 
of “Badging” can be of great help to them 
 
 A) Explain how Badging works? (3)
   
 B) What are the advantages and disadvantages of this approach? (6)
   
 C) What could be an alternative to this approach? In which scenario is an alternative approach 
more suitable? (4)
   [13]
   
Q. 3) You are an actuary of an insurance company with  a significant portfolio of PMI product. The 
Marketing department of your company feels that in order to make the existing product more 
attractive we should start covering alternative system of medicine as well, like, Ayurveda, 
Naturopathy, Homeopathy, Acupressure, etc.  
 
 A) What do you think are the product development and pricing considerations while 
providing such benefit? (6)
   
 B) What safeguards would you provide in the product to protect long term interest of the 
company?    
(4)
   [10]
   
Q. 4) You are an actuary of an insurance company deal ing in inpatient indemnity product. The overall 
average claim size of said product has increased from Rs. 25,100 in 2010 to Rs. 30,200 in 2011. 
One of your colleagues feels that we should file  price revision of the product without any delay 
to counter the inflationary trend shown by the sharp increase in average claim size. He is also of 
the opinion that upward revision in premium should be around 20% throughout all plans. What will be your course of action in this situation? 
   [10]
   
 
  
IAI         SA1- 0512 
 Page 3 of 3   
  
Q. 5) 1) Explain the two approaches to underwriting a medical reimbursement product: 
  - (1A) Full medical underwriting , and  
  - (1B) Moratorium underwriting  (6)
 2) What are the advantages and disadvantages to policyholder under the approach of 
moratorium underwriting? (5)
   
   
 3) What are the challenges that are faced by insurance companies adopting moratorium 
underwriting and what could be the possible solution to overcome those challenges. (7)
   
 4) What could be the possible reasons to try this approach of underwriting in India? (3)
   [21]
   
Q. 6) A) What is the difference between renewability and reviewability in the context of health 
contracts? (4)
   
 B) Explain the various types of reviewable and re newable health contracts which exist in life, 
general and standalone insurance companies in Indian context? (2)
   [6]
   
Q. 7) A) What are the common exclusions that ar e relevant in the context of a medical 
reimbursement policy? (3)
   
 B) You are Chief Actuary of an insurance company with substantial portfolio of health 
insurance policies in India. Suppose regulator has come up with a draft regulation that 
intends to do away with the common exclusion under health policy and cover people living 
with HIV/Aids (PLHA) based on demand from government bodies and public authorities. 
The gist of the draft regulation is: 
  • There cannot be outright denial of cover to PLHA, rather insurance companies 
need to have in place clear cut underwriting policy for PLHA based on severity of disease 
  • Insurance companies are allowed to charge additional loading to PLHA based on 
different stages of disease. 
  • No claim should be denied for a person who turns HIV positive during the course 
of policy. Moreover, in such cases policy renewal can also not be denied although premium can be loaded based on underwriting policy. 
  The regulator has asked views from the insu rance industry in this matter.  As a 
representative of an insurance company in your professional capacity how would you put 
forth arguments for or against this circular to the regulator? 
(20)
   [23]
  ******************** 
 
