INSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA  
 
EXAMINATIONS  
 
 
19th November  2013 
Subject SA1 – Health and Care Insurance  
Time allowed: Three hours ( 14.45* - 18.00 Hrs)  
Total Marks: 100  
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES  
 
1. Please read the instructions on the front page of answer booklet and 
instructions to examinees sent along with hall ticket carefully and follow 
without exception . 
2. * You have 15 minutes at the start of the examination in which to read 
the questions. You are strongly encouraged to use this time for readi ng 
only, but notes may be made. You then have three hours to complete the 
paper.  
3. You must not start writing your answers in the answer sheet until 
instructed to do so by the supervisor . 
4. The answers are expected to be India Specific application for the 
syllabus and corresponding core reading. However, substantially the core 
reading material is still taken from material supplied by Actuarial 
Education Company which are meant for UK Fellowsh ip examination. 
The core reading also contains some material which is India Specific, 
mostly the IRDA regulation. In view of this, it should be noted that focal 
point of answers is expected to be India Specific application. However if 
application specific to any other country is quoted in the answer the 
candidate  should answer the question with reference to Indian 
environment.  
5. Attempt all questions, beginning your answer to each question on a 
separate sheet.  
6. Mark allocations are shown in brackets.  
7. Please check if you have received complete Question Paper and no page 
is missing. If so, kindly get new set of Question Paper from the 
Invigilator.  
AT THE END OF THE EXAMINATION  
Please return your answer book and this question paper to the supervisor separately.  
IAI         SA1- 1113  
 Page 2 of 4     
Q. 1)  i) a) Explain briefly, different ways in which premium rates can be loaded for 
policyholders at the time of renewal for a medical reimbursement policy? Give at 
least one example of any such structures that were found favourable with each of the 
life insurance and general insurance companies within the Indian insurance Industry 
in the recent past.   
 
 
 
(3) 
    
  b) Under the recent regulatory changes proposed by IRDA for health insurance, it was 
suggested by the regulator that the insurer will have to give justification along with 
supporting documentations such as last three years' claim experience before revision 
of premiums for filed products, explain a few of the reasons for this approach by 
IRDA?   
 
 
 
(2) 
    
 ii) A large standalone health insurance company is considering selling a portfolio of 
healthcare in territories other than India, what are the issues the company needs to consider 
before implementing its decision ?    
 
(15) 
    
   [20] 
    
Q. 2)  ABC Insurance Company is considering a risk transfer strategy.  Assume the role of risk officer 
for the company:  
  
 i) Discuss the ways in which reinsurance can be used to control risks  (3) 
    
 ii) Describe the advantages  and disadvantages  of Alternative Risk Transfer products.   (7) 
   
  [10] 
   
Q. 3)  i) The Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) of a general insurance company wants to introduce a 
new medical reimbursement health product.  As an appointed actuary of the company, you 
are preparing for your meeting with the CMO:   
    
  a) Describe  a process for evaluating the need for a product.  (2) 
    
  b) Describe factors to be considered when establishing a network provider.  (3) 
    
  c) Describe measures for evaluation network performance.  (3) 
    
 ii) List factors to be considered when choosing lapse assumptions for pricing individual 
medical reimbursement insurance and describe characteristics for each factor that may 
have an impact on lapse rates.    
 
(5) 
    
 iii) Group Health Insurance is used as a financial security tool by Employers to provide for 
their employees’ healthcare needs. In the recent times, the change in lifestyle and 
increasing medical costs has made it difficult for Employers to keep pace with the 
galloping medical insurance premium  bill to provide for this responsibility.  
 
As a group health actuary, you have to describe the key challenges that are faced by the 
employers and how these can be dealt with through the help of your company’s initiatives 
to the group sales head.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
    
   [20] 
   
   
IAI         SA1- 1113  
 Page 3 of 4    
Q. 4)  XYZ General Insurance Company is in the process of launching a retail pure indemnity health 
insurance product with SI of Rs 5,00,000/ - per policy with no individual rating factors. Only one 
life can be insured in one policy.  It estimated the following regarding this product for the next 
one year from the date of its launch:  
 
 Annual frequency of claim will be 10% per policy.  
 Severity of the claim will be Rs. 30,000/ - 
 It plans to sell policies through agency, brokers and also direct sales force.  As per the 
estimate of marketing department agency will contribute 50% of the total business and 
will be paid commission @ 10%. Brokers will contribute 30% of the business and will 
get brokerage @ 12%. The balance of the busin ess will be sourced by direct sales force 
and there will be no variable cost involved.  
 Amortized annual cost for underwriting and policy setup are Rs. 200/ - per policy.  
 Claim handling expenses are 5% of total claim outgo.  
 Company follows a practice of char ging 6% Management Cost for various overheads. 
The percentage is applied on total claim outgo including claims expenses and 
underwriting and policy set up cost.  
 XYZ General Insurance Company has a profit target of 4% of total premium from this 
product in t he first year which takes care of cost of capital and investment income.  
 Service tax on premium is 12% and surcharge on service tax is 3%.  
  
 i) You are requested to arrive at per policy premium to be charged including service tax for 
this product in the first year ignoring any other information not given in the question.   
(12) 
    
 ii) Assuming that the Company is able to sell 50,000 policies in the first year, prepare a brief 
table giving total inflows and outflows on various accounts verifying your answer in point 
(i).  
 
(6) 
    
 iii) Just before the product launch marketing team feels that we may have to spend extra Rs. 
50 Lac on the promotion of this product in the first year to make it a success. XYZ General 
Insurance decides to forgo the profit  from this product in the first year on account of the 
new expense items but feels that it must not make loss either. How many policies it must 
sell in order to break even in the first year of product launch considering the expense of 
business promotion an d other details given in the question provided that the premium you 
arrive at in point (i) holds good.   
 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
   
  [25] 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
IAI         SA1- 1113  
 Page 4 of 4    
Q. 5)  ABC Health Insurance Company Limited is a Standalone Health Insurance Company dealing in 
health insurance products allowed in India.   
    
 i) (A) Please give description of the major heads of Assets and Liabilities of ABC Co. giving 
their nature?   
(10) 
    
 ii) What do you understand by matching Assets and Liabilities by duration?  (4) 
   
 iii) Is it essential for ABC Co. to match its Assets and Liabilities by duration?  (2) 
    
 iv) What are the implications if the Assets and Liabilities are:  
  
  a) Exactly matched by duration   
    
  b) Not matched by duration   
   (4) 
    
 v) What can be an alternative tool to matching Assets and Liabilities by duration which can 
help ABC Co. in controlling risk of mismatch in Assets and Liabilities?   
(5) 
    
   [25] 
 ***************************   
 
 
