 
 
 
Subject SA1 – Health and Care 
Insurance  
 
 
 
May 2014  Examinations  
 
 
INDICATIVE SOLUTIONS  
 
 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 2 of 16 
 Solution  1: 
i. “Combi Product” is the combination of Pure Term Life Insurance product offered by life insurance 
companies and He alth Insurance Cover offered by non -life insurance companies/  standalone health 
insurance companies.                                                                                                                                                 [1] 
ii.   a]  Scope of Combi product class:            
Main points covered in the regulations are:  
1. This product may be promoted by life insurance or non-life insurance / stand -alone  health 
insurance  company.  
2. Products offered under “Combi Product” shall be individually cl eared under the “File and 
Use” procedure of the regulator.  
3. Riders/Add -ons can be offered subject to  File & Use  clearance.  
4. The premium components of both risks are separately identifiable and disclosed to the 
policyholders at both pre sale stage and post -sale stage and in all documents like policy 
document, sales literature.  
5. Commissions and claim payouts in respect of “Combi Products” shall be by respective 
insurers only.   
6. The Health portion of “Combi Product” shall entitle its renewability at the option of 
policyholder from the respective non -life/ standalone health insurance Company . 
7. The product may be offered both as individual insurance policy and on group insurance 
basis. However, in respect of health insurance floater policies, the pure term life insura nce 
coverage is allowed on the life of one of the earnings members of the family who is also the 
proposer on health insurance policy subject t o insurable interest and other applicable 
underwriting norms of respective insurers.  
8. Free look option is applied t o “Combi Product”  as a whole.                                                         [3] 
b] Tie up between insurers   :                  
Main points covered in the regulations are:  
1. It is mandatory that insurance companies offering the “Combi Product”  shall  have in place 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)  covering the modus operandi of marketing, policy 
service and sharing of common expenses.  
2.  A tie up is permitted between one life insurer and one non -life insurer only.  
3. Between these two insurers any number o f “Combi Product”  may be promoted.  
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 3 of 16 
 4. Insurance companies shall carry out appropriate due diligence before establishing the 
business relationship for the purpose of promoting “Combi Product” . 
5. Modus operandi of proposed policy service at various stages of policy viz  proposal stage, 
policy servicing, premium collection arrangements and claim service etc. 
6. There shall be specific time frames/ Turn Around Times (TATs) to be agreed between the 
insurance companies as part of Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for effe ctive policy 
service, transmission of premiums received etc . at various stages of policy , i.e., at pre -sale 
stage and at post -sale stage.  
7. Filing the advertisements in accordance with IRDA (Insurance, Advertisement and 
Disclosure) Regulations -2000 within 30  days from the date of issuing the advertisement with 
Authority.  
8. Proposed procedures for obtaining the prior approval of regulator for issuing Joint Sales 
Advertisement (subject to the condition that this shall be restricted to the features, terms 
and cond itions of the “Combi Product”  along with the common corporate agents.  
9. The information technology systems put in place for supporting the sale and policy service 
of the “Combi Product” . 
10. Agreement on reimbursement of expenses in consideration of common servi ces rendered 
by each other of insurance companies.  
11. Distribution Channel wise maximum commission allowed under “Combi Product” . 
12. The procedures put in place for expeditious transfer of the portion of premium that pertains 
to the other insurer of the product.  
13. Operational procedures put in place for updating premium on policy data base on a real 
time basis.  
14. Options available to policyholders of “Combi Product”  to discontinue either portion of risk 
coverage while continuing with the other portion, subject to th e extant law, regulations, 
guidelines etc.                                                                                                                                        [5] 
c] Lead insurer   :                                
1. As two insurers are invo lved in offering “Combi Product” , one of the insurer s may be 
mutually agreed to act as lead insurer in respect of each “Combi Product”  marketed 
with agreed terms, conditions and considerations.  
2.  Lead insurer plays a critical role in facilitating underwriti ng and policy service.  
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 4 of 16 
 3. Role of lead insurer shall not deter in relying upon the existing operational 
infrastructure of the partner insurance company for effective policy servicing of “Combi 
Product” .                                                                                                                                       [1] 
d] Underwriting    :           
Under the “Combi Product” , underwriting of respective portion of risk shall be carried out by 
respective insurance companies,  i.e. life insuranc e risk shall be underwritten by  Life Insurance 
Company  and health insurance portion of risk shall be underwritten by non -life/ standalone 
health insurance Company.                                                                                                                        [1] 
e] File and Use  :        
Main points covered in the regulations are:  
1. The life insurance product and the health insurance product to  be offered as “Combi                                                                   
Prod uct”  shall have prior approval under File and Use procedure.  
2. Both the independent approved products shall be integrated as a single product and  
shall be filed with the common brand name.  
3. The single  product  (“Combi Product”)  shall be offered without a ny modifications to the 
cleared products.  
4. “Combi Product”  is to be filed at the stage of integrating for getting “File and Use” 
approval irrespective of the earlier approval of either of products.  
5. File and Use application shall specify the following:  
 Lead Insurer  
 Demarcation of functions between insurers for carrying out activities  
 Procedures proposed for issuance of premium notices and lapse notices  
 Lead insurer as single nodal point of contact for receiving the servicing request, 
fulfilling the services and issuing the acknowledgements  
 Results of feasibility study if any , in giving a limited access to the policy data base 
of policies for effecting over the counter policy service requests to the lead insurer  
 The results of cost benefit analysis carried ou t by both the insurers any possibility 
of offering any discounts on the premium in the “Combi Product” . 
[5] 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 5 of 16 
 f] Distribution Channel  :            
1. The sale of “Combi Product”  shall be solicited through  
a. Direct Marketing Channel  
b.  Brokers  
c. Composite Individual  and Corporate Agents , common to both insurers  
2. “Combi Product”  shall not be marketed through bank referral arrangements . 
3. Insurers shall ensure that the “Combi Product”  is not marketed by those insurance 
intermediaries who are not authorized to market eith er of the products of either of the insurers.  
[2] 
g] Mandatory Minimum Disclosures :       
Main points covered in the regulations are:  
The mandatory minimum disclosure of “Combi Product”  shall be:  
1. The product is jointly offer ed by “ABC insurance company” ( specify name of non -life/ health 
insurance company)  and “XYZ insurance company” ( specify name of life insurance 
company)  
2. The risks of this “Combi Product”  are distinct and are assumed/ accepted by respective 
insurance companies.  
3. The liability to settle the  claim vests with respective insurers.  
4. The legal/  quasi legal disputes, if any, shall be dealt with respective insurers for respective 
benefits.  
5. Policyholders of “Combi Product”  shall be eligible to continue with either part of the policy, 
discontinuing th e other during the policy term.  
6. Where guaranteed renewability of the health insurance plan is allowed, the health 
insurance product of this “Combi Product”  is entitled to that facility.  
7. Specific disclosures on available premium payment option on these “Com bi Product” . 
8. Specific disclosures about the available policy servicing facilities of these “Combi Product” . 
9. Specific disclosures about the proposed claims service of these policies under both the risks.  
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 6 of 16 
 10.  Specific disclosures on the availability of services  of TPA for health insurance portion of risk, 
if available.  
11. Specific disclosures on the available Grievance Redressal Options  including particulars of 
Ombudsman under these “Combi Product” . 
12. Policyholders are to be advised to familiarize themselves with the  policy benefits and  policy 
service structure of the “Combi Product”  before deciding to purchase the policy.  
[5] 
iii. Risks Involved : 
 Operational Risks:   Challenges in issuance of the policy in view of different underwriting rules 
and policy conditions  of two separate products . Moreover there is also operational risk while 
servicing the combo product.  
 Reputational Risk -  
o At the point of sale: There could be very high morbidity risk and health cover may be 
declined by underwriter of health insurer and underw riter of life insurer may accept the 
mortality risk  and vice versa . It will lead to cancellation of policy application, leading to 
dissonance at customer’s end.  
o At servicing level: Servicing of the policies of combo products may be more complex 
than indivi dual products. This may lead to reputational risks to both insurers -life and 
health.   
 IT risks:  Risks of inadequate IT infrastructure and integration between systems of both insurers.  
 Pricing Risk:  
o Lapse rate assumption in pricing (more important for the Life Insurance product) could 
be significantly different than pricing assumption.  
o Expense Risk - Harder to predict additional costs involved in servicing the “Combi 
Product”.  
 There may be challenges in arriving at the formula for sharing the actual costs i ncurred by both 
insurers pertaining to underwriting , fixed administration  and servicing costs of the policy and 
hence may pose challenges in pricing such types of combi plans.   
 
 Compliance Risk: Actual practice followed may be different from Regulatory req uirement.  
 
[4] 
            [Total Marks -27] 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 7 of 16 
 Solution 2  : 
i. Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) :  
QALYs provide a single health state measure combining quantity and quality of life; a generic 
measure that sums years spent in different health states using weights, on a scale of 0 (dead) to 1 
(perfectly healthy) for each health state.   
[2] 
ii. Uses  of QALYs :  
● to help allocate resources to the most cost -effective treatments  
● to help decide what treatment option will be best for a particular patient.  
For many national healthcare systems, the cost effectiveness of healthcare treatment is  becoming 
increasingly i mportant as these systems come under increasing pressure to be  efficient.  
One of the most useful aspects of QALYs is that they allow the ‘value for money’ provided by different 
interventions to be measured in a common unit - ‘cost per QALY’. This method is  often used to rank 
different types of medical interventions, including drugs, to determine the best use of resources. This 
can provide information on the comparative effectiveness of interventions within the same disease area 
(for example, conventional ve rsus keyhole surgery for uterine fibroids), but more importantly it allows 
comparisons of the relative effectiveness of interventions from different therapy areas (for example, 
keyhole surgery for uterine fibroids versus screening for breast cancer). This information can help to 
inform both treatment decision making within a therapy area and resource allocation decisions across 
therapy areas.                                                                                                                                                              [4] 
iii. Advanta ges of QALYs  : 
 QALY is a s ummary measure that combines both mortality and morbidity in a single figure  
 Can be used to assist health care providers in making decisions such as prioritising  treatments  
 QALYs  can help the  long -term effectiveness of treatments.  For example, the results of QALYs 
may indicate that a more expensive operation will actually be cheaper in the long run, due to 
requiring less follow -up treatment or there being a lower risk of recur rence.  
 Provide a framework for valuing the health gains associated with interventions  
 Combine estimates of both the extra length of life gained from an intervention and the quality 
of the extra life gained  
 Allow comparisons of the effectiveness of one inte rvention for a problem with the effectiveness 
of another intervention for the same problem  
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 8 of 16 
  Allow comparisons across disease areas to help show which programmes provide the greatest 
allocative efficiency  
Disadvantage s : 
 Quality of life being expressed in te rms of numbers  
 Value assigned to life varies with the health state of the person  
 All emphasis is placed on the size of health improvement, ignoring the starting point.  
 Values assigned to the quality of life  component of the QALY may not reflect  the values  of 
patients receiving the  intervention  
 May lack sensitivity within a  disease area  
 Can over -simplify complex healthcare  issues and suggest ‘quick and easy’  resource allocation 
decisions  
 Focus on quality of life in life years rather than quality of life in a person’s daily function.  
[6] 
iv. a] Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs ) under  Drug-1, Drug-2 and Drug -3 
For Drug -1: 
QALY = 1*23.47%+1*50%  
QALY= 0.7347  
For Drug -2: 
QALY = 1*25%+1*39.85%  
QALY= 0.6485  
For Drug -3: 
QALY =0.5*10%+1 *25%+0.5*36.44%  
QALY= 0. 4822  
Chemotherapy Drug -> Drug -1 Drug -2 Drug -3 
QALY  0.7347  0.6485  0.4822  
 [3] 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 9 of 16 
 b] Cost per Quali ty Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) per patient under Drug -1, Drug -2 and Drug -3 
Chemotherapy Drug -> Drug -1 Drug -2 Drug -3 
Treatment Cost per patient (in Rs) (a)             
  7,81,700                   
7,64,500                
4,26,800  
QALY (b)       0.7347  0.6485  0.4822  
Cost  per QALY ( (a)/(b) )        10,63,972          11,78,874      8,85,110  
                       [3] 
c]   Incremental cost per  Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) of Drug -1 versus Drug -2            
Chemotherapy 
Drug -> Drug -1 Drug -2 Increment between  Drug -1 and 
Drug -2 
Treatment Cost per 
patient (in Rs)                
   781,700                   
764,500                  17,200                       (x) 
QALY  0.7347  0.6485                  0.0862                        (y)  
Cost   per QALY       1,063,972     1,178,874    
Incremental cost per QALY of Drug -1 vs Drug -2  
                                                                     ( (x)/(y) )               199,536  
           [2] 
d] Incremental cost per Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) of Drug -1 versus Drug -3  
Chemotherapy Drug -> Drug -1 Drug -3 Increment 
between  Drug -
1 and Drug -3 
Treatment Cost per patient (in 
Rs)                  
781,700                
426,800                   
354,900 (x) 
QALY  0.7347  0.4822                      
0.2525 (y) 
Cost   per QALY                
1,063,972                
885,110    
Incremental cost per QALY of Drug -1 vs Drug -3 ( (x)/ (y) )  1,405,545  
[2] 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 10 of 16 
 e] Interpret  above  numerical results in a non-technical  way.          
1. Drug -1 costs Rs 17,200 more than Drug -2 but results in an extra 0.0862 QALYs, which is 
equivalent to an extra 31 days (0.0862*365 days) of perfect health. The incremental cost per 
QALY for Drug -1 vs Drug -2 is Rs. 199,536. In other words, the extra cost to gain one additional 
QALY (ie. One year of perfect health)  by using Drug -1 instead of Drug -2 is Rs. 199,536.  
2. Drug -1 costs Rs 354,900  more than Drug -3 but results in an extra 0. 2525  QALYs, which is 
equivale nt to an extra 92 days (0. 2525 *365 days) of perfect health. The incremental co st per 
QALY for Drug -1 vs Drug -3 is Rs. 1,405,545 . In other words, the extra cost to gain one additional 
QALY (ie. One year of perfect health) by using Drug -1 instead of Drug -3 is Rs. Rs. 1 ,405,545 . 
 
3. Though cost per QALY  suggest s that Drug -3 may provide greater value for money than Drug -1 (ie 
Cost  per QALY for Drug -3 is lower than Drug -1), whereas the incremental values (which most 
closely reflect the choices faced in healthcare d ecision making) show that Drug -1 can be 
considered good value for money compared with Drug -3 due to the extra QALYs it provides.  
 
4. Though cost per QALY  suggest s that  Drug -2 may provide lower value for money than Drug -1 (ie 
Cost  per QALY for Drug -2 is high er than Drug -1), whereas the incremental values (which most 
closely reflect the choices faced in healthcare decision making) show that Drug -1 can be 
considered good value for money compared with Drug -2 due to the extra QALYs it provides.  
 
5. Incremental cost per QALY of Drug -1 vs Drug -3 is higher compared to Drug -1 vs Drug -2. 
[4] 
                       [Total Marks -26] 
Solution 3  : 
i) Product Design:  
- Find out details about the products offered by competitors catering to Senior Citizen segment  
- Assess the needs for  Senior Citizen , probably  by a consumer survey  
- Compare products offered by competitors against the needs for Senior citizen, find out the gaps 
(if any) and try to bridge the gap through product design  
- Get a good understanding of company strategy/selling pr ocess, proposed underwriting guideline 
and claim philosophy from respective departments with regard to the proposed product  
- Discuss with IT, Operation and Accounts department regarding Product set up and 
administration part.  
- Accordingly, assess the risks a ssociated with the product offering and fine tune product offering 
to mitigate the risks  
- Ensure product design is compliant with Health Regulation  
 
 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 11 of 16 
 Pricing:  
- Collect internal claim data and  conduct pricing analysis to arrive at risk premium  
- Assess externa l factors like Competitors pricing, Medical inflation, potential impact of 
advancement of medical technology in future, Regulatory & legal requirement if any, Tax etc,  
- Consider affordability level of senior citizen (demand elasticity)  
- Collect claim data fr om external source (e.g. IIB). Interpret the results keeping in mind the issues 
and challenges associated with external source of data  
- Ascertain all associated expenses (Direct and Indirect)  
- In consultation with Sales team, need to  project realistic busine ss volume for next few years  in 
order to spread initial fixed expenses (eg. Promotional cost, initial set up cost ) over the 
project ed number of policies in next few years  (eg. three years) and Capital requirement.  
- Consider the financial position of the Co mpany a gainst the Capital requirement and discuss with 
senior management if case of major mismatch.  
- Consider cost of Capital /profit margin . 
- Do sensitivity testing on important pricing assumptions to assess the impact on Capital 
requirement . Fine tune pric ing if required.  
Other considerations:  
-  In absence of market information/data limitation (or credibility), help from Reinsurer / 
Consultant may be sought for. In addition, also decide on whether Reinsurance support is 
required for the product depending on parameters like uncertainty regarding pricing 
assumptions, company’s risk appetite, company’s financial strength etc . 
- Take feedback from other stake holders, mainly Sales team. It is important to get their buying . 
[6] 
ii) Main needs:  
- Chance of Pre -existing con dition/disease is very high in senior citizen segment.                                 
Hence it is expected that product has minimum waiting period with regard to Pre -existing 
condition  
- Low premium  
- No sub -limits  
- Simple product design /wording  
- Product shoul d offer OPD (doctor’s consultancy fee), medicine cost and diagnostic charges. It is 
one area where senior citizens spend a significant amount of money from their saving  
- Product must offer cashless facility  
- Life time renewal  
- Higher entry age  
[3] 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 12 of 16 
 iii) Pre-existi ng condition:  
Absence of ‘’ PED/defined illness waiting period’’  in a voluntary offer scheme can be a very 
dangerous proposition as it may attract high anti -selection.  
 
Option like ‘’ With Medical Underwriting  ‘’ and ‘ ’Without Medical underwriting’’  can be offered. 
Customers who opt for Medical underwriting (and accepted), can be given waiver of waiting period 
(or reduced waiting period). Customers who opt for “ No Medical Underwriting’’  will be subject to a 
minimum waiting period ( in addition, some of the ca ses may not be accepted at the outset).  
 
Or else, high co -pay/deductible  can be applied on PED related claims.  
 
Or family floater policy only, which is expected to reduce the anti -selection part.  
 
Premium:  
 In anticipation of high claim frequency and high  claim cost, premium is expected to be high for   
senior citizen segment.  
  
In order to ensure that premium is not high, co -pay/deductible on claim  or cap on surgery may be 
proposed.  
 
 Acceptance only through medical underwriting or waiting period in absen ce of medical 
underwriting  (as  proposed under pre -existing condition  above) may be proposed which is 
expected to control the claim experience, hence a relatively lower price.  
                   
No Sub -limits:  
Given the target segment, it is a very risky  proposition as expected claim severity is relatively much 
higher than that of younger segment.  
 
Some form of limit is required for this product in the form of disease/surgery cap or room rent cap 
which will also control behaviour of the policyholder and e nsure a reasonable premium.  
  Co-pay on claim or lower sum insured coverage can be another option.  
           
Simple product design:  
 
It is a big challenge considering the likely inclusion of deductible/co -pay/sum -limit restriction in the 
product.  
 
Post sa le, a welcome call (or probably a visit at customer’s address)  may  be made to customer to 
verify whether he/she has understood the important terms and conditions. If he/she has not 
understood it properly, company representative must ensure that customer un derstands the terms 
and conditions and get a final confirmation from customer with regard to his/her understanding.  
 If customer is still not happy, policy should be cancelled with customer’s consent and entire 
premium should be refunded back.  
 
 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 13 of 16 
 OPD/Medicin e/diagnostic cost coverage:  
 
It is difficult to price as expected utilization rate is not very certain (could be quite high).  
 
Given the need and associated uncertainty, instead of OPD coverage, service offering (health care 
package) can be added to the pr oduct in the form of giving some free consultancy charges, discount 
in medicine and diagnostic test charges  in networking centres which can be done by partnering 
with a third party who can offer the service network.  
 
OPD coverage may be provided only at network clinic, probably with a co -pay.  
 
Higher entry age  
 
 At higher age, pricing risk becomes higher due to limited data availability and health related 
complication.  
 
Higher entry age can be allowed with pre acceptance medical underwriting.  
[12] 
 
iv) Specia l Provisions for Senior Citizens in Health Regulation, 2013:  
1) The premium charged for health insurance products offered to senior citizens shall be fair, 
justified, transparent and duly disclosed upfront. The insured shall be informed in writing of any 
underwriting loading charged over and above the premium and the specific consent of the 
policyholder for such loadings shall be obtained before issuance of a policy.  
2) All health insurers and TPAs, as the case may be, shall establish a separate channel to address 
the health insurance related claims and grievances of senior citizens.    
[2] 
v) Life-time renewal:  
Availability of data (morbidity rate and claim severity) at higher age is limited.  Pricing becomes a 
challenge.  
In future, when new business growth red uces due to market saturation and competition, renewal 
business will become the biggest contributor in the portfolio. Pricing risk will be very high due to 
two main factors:  
i) Average age of portfolio will be quite high and ability to price correctly at high er age may 
impose a huge challenge.  
ii) Selective lapsing can be a bigger problem at a higher age. Premium affordability becomes a very 
important point here.  
 
Portability:  
 
Customer coming under portability will be getting due credit of the waiting period serv ed with 
previous insurer(s). Correct disclosure in proposal form becomes very important here. If customer 
fails to disclose medical history (PED) and claims shortly due to pre -existing related health condition, 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 14 of 16 
 Insurer will have to pay the claim due to wai ver of PED waiting period (presuming PED and time 
bound waiting period  for defined illnesses/surgeries  is completely waived off  in that particular case ). 
 
It will impact pricing assumptions as generally they do not recognize PED related claim during the 
initial years of a fresh policy due to PED waiting period  (and time bound waiting period of defined 
illnesses) restriction. It is a bigger risk for a start -up company where fresh business (with PED waiting 
period) contributes the most and pricing assumptions recognize the same.  
 
It may also lead to reputational risk due to potential dispute at the time of claim settlement , if 
Insurer decides to repudiate PED related claim on the basis of non -disclosure of material fact in the 
proposal form at the time of apply ing for the  policy (where customer fails to disclose PED condition 
in proposal form).  
[5] 
vi) Life time renewal :   
- A pool can be formed for senior citizens where every insurer will participate and share the risk s 
together . 
- Reinsurance support. Availability ma y be a challenge although.  
- Diversify into other regions, product categories.  
- Product related restriction at higher age like co -payment; surgery cap can help to control the 
cost.  
- Preventive healthcare related service:  Health care service is one area which insurers can 
explore. Through this area, they can explore two important aspects:  
i)    They can manage the entire life cycle of policyholder, hence a better control on policyholder’s 
health status  
ii)   It can give them another source of revenue  
 
- Probably invest ing some small portion of yearly premium in long term assets to meet liabilities 
in later part of the policy life cycle? Pricing model, accounting principles and Regulatory 
guidelines need to be considered accordingly.  
Portability:  
- Accept cases with Medica l underwriting only, irrespective of age profile  
- Post sale, make a welcome call to customer to explain policy terms and conditions clearly  and 
take a re -confirmation from customer that he/she is not suffering from any  PED condition ( in 
cases where he/sh e did not disclose medical history in proposal form)  
Have a margin in pricing recognizing the effect of portability. However, it may impact the competitive 
position of the product .                                                                                                                                            [5] 
                                                                                                                                                             [Total Marks -33] 
 
 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 15 of 16 
  
Solution 4  :  i. 
- Considering the size of group, 100% weight  may  be given to Client’s claim experience  
- Data needs to be adjusted by IBNR estimate  
- Claim experience may not represent complete one year’s experience(Generally 10 -11 months)  
- In that case, c laim experience needs to be adjusted to represent complete year 
experience (Proportional should be an acceptable approach)  
- The overall claim estimate needs to be adjusted if number of lives at renewal is different from 
that of current year  
- It then needs to be adjusted by M edical inflation  
- Claim experience needs to be modified if there are changes in policy features at renewal as 
compared to current year  
- Calculated Risk premium is to be adjusted by acquisition cost, management expenses 
(contribution towards fixed expenses of  insurer), policy processing cost, claim handling expenses 
(e.g. TPA fee) & Profit margin. Accordingly, final premium is calculated.  
- Commercial consideration needs to be  taken .                                                                                       [4] 
ii. For a small group, it may not be credible to use Client’s prior claim experience as that may be 
expected to vary significantly from year to year.  
 
Hence , better approach could be to use Insurer’s own internal rate  (claim related cost)  witho ut 
relying much on  Client’s past claim experience. The approach should be to price all such quotes with 
internal rate, associated expenses and same profit margin (as a % of Premium).  
 
With this approach, insurer is expected to make profit s in some cases a nd may incur losses in some 
other cases. However, at portfolio level comprising all such small clients, insurer should be able to 
achieve the set profit margin, used in each case. Here the assumption is internal rate should match 
the claim experience at po rtfolio level.  
If competitors are not using the same approach, with all likelihood they will be quoting lower 
premium s in those cases where the actual past claim experience is very faurable . Hence quote 
conversion could be a real challenge.                                                                                                                [4] 
 
iii. In Corporate scheme (Employer’s employee), generally PEDs (Pre Existing Diseases) are covered 
from day one without employees or his/her dependents bein g subject to medical underwriting. If the 
scheme is on voluntary basis, anti -selection risk could be very  high.   
Actual volume may be lower than assumed in pricing. Insurer may not be able to recoup its set up 
cost.  
Ways to mitigate it:  
- Minimum participati on commitment from Client  
- Offering family floater policy only (no individual offering)  
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                                     SA1-0514  
Page 16 of 16 
 Above two approaches, will ensure that insurer gains both the good risks and poor risks and not 
just a selection of poor risks.  
- A prescribed benefit formula: It can be  linked to employee’s salary by means of a simple formula.  
 
This will prevent poor risks over -insuring and good risks choosing to under insure with a 
consequence adverse impact on the actual claims cost.  
- Need to ensure that premium rate charged is relati vely lower which can be achieved through 
various forms of restrictions in the policy design, e.g. deductible, co -pay in all claims/co -pay in 
PED related claims, room rent choice restrictions, cap on surgeries etc  
 
Lower premium rate will attract good risks  in the portfolio. It will also help to control the overall 
claim cost.  
- Enrolment period should have a closed window. No participation will be allowed once the 
enrolment period gets over.  
 
It will ensure that people don’t get a chance to enter the portfoli o when they actually feel the 
need (e.g. post doctor’s advice).  
 
- A minimum waiting period, e.g. 3 months for PED cases.  
 
It will avoid all those cases where employees have enrolled with the objective of immediately 
utilizing the policy. It should have a po sitive impact on claim experience.  
 
- Free cover concept: Anybody opting for higher sum insured than the free cover, will be subject to 
medical underwriting.  
 
Presence of medical underwriting for higher sum insured cases will help the insurer to keep a 
contr ol on large claim risk.  
 
[6] 
[Total Marks -14] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***************************  
