INSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA  
 
EXAMINATIONS  
 
 
27th May  2014 
Subject SA1 – Health and Care Insurance  
Time allowed: Three hours ( 14.45* - 18.00 Hrs)  
Total Marks: 100  
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES  
 
1. Please read the instructions on the front page of answer booklet and 
instructions to examinees sent along with hall ticket carefully and follow 
without exception . 
2. * You have 15 minutes at the start of the examination in which  you are 
required to read the questions. You are strongly encouraged to use this 
time for reading only, but notes may be made. You then have three hours 
to complete the paper.  
3. You must not start writing your answers in the answer sheet until 
instructed to do so by the supervisor . 
4. The answers are expected to be India Specific application for the 
syllabus and corresponding core reading. However, substantially the core 
reading material is still taken from material supplied by Actuarial 
Education Company which are meant for UK Fellowship examination. 
The core reading also contains  some material which is India Specific, 
mostly the IRDA regulation. In view of this, it should be noted that focal 
point of answers is expected to be India Specific application. However , if 
application specific to any other country is quoted in the answer the 
candidate  should answer the question with reference to Indian 
environment.  
5. Attempt all questions, beginning your answer to each question on a 
separate sheet.  
6. Mark allocations are shown in brackets.  
7. Please check if you have received complete Question Pa per and no page 
is missing. If so, kindly get new set of Question Paper from the 
Invigilator.  
AT THE END OF THE EXAMINATION  
Please return your answer book and this question paper to the supervisor separately.  
    
IAI         SA1- 0514  
 Page 2 of 3     
Q. 1)  i) What is the meaning of “ Combi Product”?   (1) 
    
 ii) You are the Appointed Actuary of “Healthy Insurance Company”. Company intends to 
introduce the Combi  Product to its prospective policyholders.  Your CEO has asked you to 
prepare the note for the Board members covering the applicable regulations for this type of 
product. In particular, your note should discuss the following points covered by the Health 
regulations.  
  
  a) Scope of Combi Product class      (3) 
    
  b) Tie up between insurers               (5) 
    
  c) Lead insurer                            (1) 
    
  d) Underwriting     (1) 
    
  e) File and Use  (5) 
    
  f) Distribution Channel  (2) 
    
  g) Mandatory Minimum Disclosures  (5) 
    
 iii) Describe four major risks involved in designing and pricing such type of products?   (4) 
    
  Note:  Wherever relevant please refer to the various regulations issued by IRDA from time 
to time related to “ Combi Products” to answer this question.   
[27] 
    
Q. 2)  i) Describe   “Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs)”                                                                     (2) 
    
 ii) Describe uses of QALYs.   (4) 
    
 iii) What are advantages and disadvantages of QALYs?                                                                     (6) 
    
 iv) Medical interventions are required to treat metastatic (advanced) breast cancer. It is 
required to estimate the extra cost and health gain associated with treatment with Drug -1 
compared with two other drugs  - Drug  - 2 and Drug  - 3. (These are chemotherapy drugs.)  
 
Chemotherapy Drug -> Drug -1 Drug -2 Drug -3 
Treatment Cost per patient (in Rs)   7,81,700  7,64,500  4,26,800  
   
  Using  Drug -1,  patient’s expected life expectancy will  be two years - first one year with 
23.47% of perfect health (normal)  and subsequent  one year with  50% of perfect health 
(normal).  
 
Using  Drug -2, patient’s expected life expectancy will  be two ye ars - first one year with 
25% of perfect health (normal)  and subsequent  one year  with  39.85% of perfect health 
(normal).  
  
    
    
    
    
IAI         SA1- 0514  
 Page 3 of 3   Using Drug -3, patient’s expected life expectancy will be two years - first six months with 
10% of perfect health (normal), subsequent one year with 25% of perfect health (normal) 
and the last 6 months with 36.44% of perfect health (normal).  
 
Please estimate the:  
  
  a) Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) under Drug -1, Drug -2 and Drug -3. (3) 
    
  b) Cost per Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) per patient under Drug -1, Drug -2 and 
Drug -3.  
(3) 
    
  c) Incremental cost per Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) of Drug -1 versus Drug -2. (2) 
    
  d) Incremental cost per Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) of Drug -1 versus Drug -3. (2) 
    
  e) Interpret above numerical results in a non -technical way.   (4) 
    
[26] 
    
Q. 3)  You are working as the Product Actuary of your organization. Your Distribution Head is excited 
about the untapped opportunity that lies with senior citizen segment.  
 
He has requested your help with regard to designing & pricing of the product pertaining t o the 
senior citizen segment.  
  
 i) What are the broad steps will you follow to develop this product?   (6) 
    
 ii) What are the main needs of senior citizen segment in the context of Health indemnity 
products available in the Indian market?     
(3) 
    
 iii) What are the challenges with regard to addressing some or all of those needs and how do 
you plan to address them?   
(12) 
    
 iv) Explain the special provisions for senior citizen segments as mentioned in the Health 
Regulation, 2013.   
(2) 
    
 v) Discuss the two major risks, a product actuary is expected to deal with, in terms of product 
design and pricing, post implementation of Health Regulation, 2013.   
(5) 
    
 vi) How those risks can be mitigated?   (5) 
    
[33] 
    
Q. 4)  You are the pricing Actuary of your organization. You have been asked to price a large (5000 
lives) Corporate quote (Group – Employer’s employee) for the upcoming renewals where 
participation is on compulsory basis. You have been provided client’s current year’s claim  
experience of Private Medical Insurance (PMI) at a summary level.   
    
 i) Discuss the main steps you will follow to determine the final premium.  (4)  
    
 ii) Will your approach be different for a small corporate (e.g. 300 lives)?  If yes, discuss the  
merits and demerits of that approach.   
(4)  
    
 iii) You have been asked to design a policy contract of PMI with a corporate client 
(Employer’s employee) along with determination of premium rates, where participation is 
on voluntary basis. Discuss the associated risks with reasons and control measures you 
would consider before designing such contract.    
 
 
(6)  
    
[14] 
  **************************   
 
