 
 
 
Subject SA1 – Health and Care 
Insurance  
 
 
 
October 2014 Examination  
 
 
 
INDICATIVE SOLUTION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Solution 1:  
Advantages  of Cashless system from insured’s perspective : 
Cashless settlement of claims has allowed beneficiari es to avail the  medical treatment at a panel  of 
networking  hospital s of insurance company without bearing the financial burden of treatment cost.  
Hospitals have started publicizing the cashless facility,  which has increased the awareness.   
Less administrat ive work in cashless facility compared to reimbursement  from policyholders 
perspective . 
It also assures the insured about the quality of the service provider.  
 
Disadvantages of Cashless system from insured’s perspective:  
Insured may be offered exhaustive a nd extensive medical treatments which may be unnecessary 
even though very moderate treatment could have cured his illness. It may also mean longer 
hospitalization than usually would be required.  
Insured should always be aware of the latest list of network providers to enjoy cashless facility. 
Otherwise, he /she  may end up paying the hospital bills first and then r eimburse  the same from the 
insurer.  Insured also may have to keep smart card/identity card issued by insurer/TPA safely to 
receive cashless facili ties to avoid last moment hitch . 
List of networking hospitals may restrict insurer’s choice. Commuting could pose a challenge if 
networking hospital is not at nearby location. It may pose a serious problem especially  in the case of 
an emergency.  
Pre-author ization is required, which  may not be liked by the insured.  
 Due to compliance requirement of responding within a defined time frame, insurer/TPA under TAT 
pressure, may reject the Cashless request and ask the insured to submit the case under 
Reimbursement  mode.  
 
Advantages of Cashless from insurer’s perspective:  
 Pre-negotiated tariff with networking hospitals may help the insurer to control the claim  outgo. It 
may help insurer  to maintain a competitive pricing framework in the market.  As per IRDA health 
regulations, for cash less facilities , legal MOU must be signed between the insurer and the network 
hospital. If any network hospital is found to be doing fraud, then dealing legally with the hospital 
becomes operationally easier due to signed legal MOU.  
Due to legal MOU, it is easy for insurer to get better accessibility  to hospital MIS and administration.  
If insurer is not happy with the services of the hospital network, then as per the provision mentioned 
in the MOU, it can cancel the agreement.  
As per MO U, insurer can inspect the premises of the network provider at any time without prior 
intimation . It reduces the chance of fraudulent claims.  
Early intimation through Pre -authorization gives the following benefits to the insurer:  
- Opportunity to investigate  live case, hence less chance of fraud  
- Chance to negotiate  with networking hospital, if the proposed surgery  does not belong to  
the pre -defined package list  
- Ability to direct the insured to a cheaper networking hospital without compromising on the 
medica l facility  
- Ability to reject at the outset in case of any doubt  
    
 
Disadvantages of Cashless from insurer’s perspective  
Under cashless facility, t here may be fraudulent cases and treatment cost might have been 
deliberately inflated by some network provi der hospitals . This may lead to higher claim outgo from 
insurer’s perspective.  
More  administ rative  work is involved from insurers perspective like negotiating with network 
provider  hospitals  on the applicable tariff  for various medical treatments, deve lopment and 
maintenance of IT and administration system of directly paying the claim s to the network provider ’s 
bank account etc . It also leads to additional cost.  
           [8 Marks]   
Solution 2:  
i)  
a) In an employer employee Group policy, generally the Emplo yer purchases the Insurance 
policy as a service benefit for its employees and pays the premium either in full or in 
part.  Here, master policyholder is the employer and the employees are beneficiaries .  
 
In the customized group policy (non -employer -employe e), generally the members of the 
group pay the premium and they are insurance  beneficiaries and the 
organizer/administrator/manager (in this case, the Bank) is the holder of the group 
policy (Master policy holder).  
 
b) In compulsory employer - employee Group p olicy, the employer may issue confirmation 
of insurance protection to individual employees with clear reference to the group 
insurance policy and securing the benefits of the employees.  
 
In the customized group policy, certificate of insurance is required to be issued to the 
members of the group.  Such certificate of insurance contains information on the 
schedule of benefits, the premium charged to the individual member and important 
terms and conditions of the contract.  
 
c) In employer - employee group policy,  an employee (and his/her dependents) can be the 
only beneficiary.  
 
In the customized group policy, there should be clearly evident relationship (non -
insurance based) between the master policyholder and the members covered under the 
group policy. In the cu rrent context, only the customers (and his/her dependents) of the 
bank (only when they become customers of the bank due to some non -insurance 
relationship, e.g.  Bank account holders/ loanees) can be insured beneficiaries.  
                                                                                                                                                        [5] 
ii) 
Anti -selection:  
It will be very important to understand the sales model. It is important to understand if 
the bank will still con tinue to offer both the products (retail PMI product and customized 
group policy) and if so, how they will differentiate the target segment. Unless there is a 
clear understanding, it is safer to assume that customers will have a choice between two 
policies .  
 
In such scenario, Insurer will be exposed to selection risk. Pricing of the proposed group 
policy is most likely to be higher than that of the retail product in lieu of the waiting 
period waiver and medical test requirement triggering  from the age of 55 (instead of 
46). On average Healthier risks, will apply for retail product due to price differentials. 
Customers, who have higher propensity to claim, will opt for the proposed group policy.  
Poor disclosure rate in proposal form may compound the proble m. 
 
Needy people may open bank account in order to participate in the group insurance 
policy.  
Lapse & re -entry risk in retail policy:  
Those Bank customers, who have recently purchased the retail policy   (subject to 
waiting period restriction) and who are in poor health, may lapse their retail policy and 
opt for the group policy.  It compounds the selection risk.  
 
Due to this kind of selective lapsing,  Insurer may not recoup some of the initial expenses 
(e.g. pre -acceptance medical check -up cost) which migh t have been spread over several 
policy years in pricing assumptions of  the retail product.   
 
Pricing assumption and data risk:  
Proposition is voluntary with PEDs being covered from day one and mandatory pre -
acceptance medical test requirement kicks only  from the age of 55 (as opposed to the 
age of 46 ). Insurer may not have experience of such kind of portfolio .  Pricing 
assumptions are associated with high level of uncertainty and risks.  
High contingency margin in pricing due  to above  factors may lead to an  unattractive 
proposition to the members. Moreover, there is a high chance of difference between 
actual and expected experience.  
 
Volume risk:  
Higher contingency margin in pricing may lead to only needy people opting for the 
policy. Actual volume could be m uch smaller than assumed at the outset. Pricing 
assumptions may not hold true in such scenario.  
 
The attractive propositions of waiting period waiver and higher age of pre -acceptance 
medical check, may lead to a higher volume than expected. This may put a dministrative 
pressure on the insurer.  
 
Expense risk:  
Lower volume may lead to insurer not being able to recoup its initial fixed  expenses like 
system development cost, training cost and marketing cost.  
 
Higher than expected volume may increase the adminis tration cost, e.g. recruitment of 
additional man -power, increasing the scalability of the system etc.  
 
There is a general risk that actual expenses are higher than assumed in the pricing.  
 
Miss -selling/policy disclosure risk:  
Applicants may not be explaine d properly the need of true disclosure in the proposal 
form. It may be intended to avoid the hassle of pre -acceptance medical test and risk of 
losing business. Insurer loses the right of underwriting an application, which might have 
been declined due to he alth condition.  
 
Reputation risk:  
If claims are repudiated due to non -disclosure of material fact in proposal form, 
customers may complain of mis -selling. It may lead to bad publicity. It may also strain 
the relationship between Insurer and bank.  
 
Competit ion risk:  
Need to find out if there is any other insurance company in the competition. Need to 
consider the pricing of the competitor while quoting.  
 
Capital consideration:  
If the potential volume is very large, it becomes important to assess the capital 
requirement, specially the economic capital requirement if actual experience turns out 
to be worse than expected. Need to consider the solvency position of the company in 
the worst case scenario.  
 
Challenges in processes like certificate of issuance,  concen tration risk (if bank is a small 
regional bank), business & claim administration need to be recognized as well. 
Relationship with the Bank will be an important factor to consider.  
[10] 
iii)    Anti -Selection : 
- Have dialogue with the senior management of the  Bank and reach   an agreement 
with the Bank on the business model. Two likely solutions: a) offer the Group policy 
to a particular segment of Bank customers only (e.g. loanee profiles) b) only offer 
the Group policy going forward (stop selling the retail PMI policy).  
- Reduce the contingency margin in the pricing. Try to make the price of the group 
policy in line with retail product offered by the company. It will remove the price 
differential thereby addressing selection risk and ensure a large portfolio wh ich is 
expected to be a mix of good and bad risks.  
- Offer  a Co -pay or Deductible . 
- Train the Bank employees (who will be responsible to present the Group policy to 
customer) to ensure that customers are guided and encouraged to disclose any past 
medical his tory in the proposal form. Customers also need to be sensitized about 
the consequence of hiding material fact in the proposal form. Tighten the policy 
wording as well.  
Probably a post -sale welcome call (or a personal visit) to explain the terms and 
conditi ons of the policy and re -confirming the information disclosed in the proposal 
form. However, associated expenses need to be considered. Sales literature should 
be appropriately designed. It  is expected to address the mis -selling/policy disclosure 
part as w ell. 
- Minimum take up rate commitment from the Bank  
 
Lapse & re -entry risk in retail policy:  
- Make an internal process where retail customers (customers of bank who have 
purchased retail insurance policy) can participate in the group policy only at 
renewal. Give them a time window during renewal of retail policy, beyond which 
they will not be able to convert to the group policy.  
- Make those cases subject to medical underwriting (at least a tele -underwriting) or 
take a good health declaration from the customers .  
 
Pricing assumption and data risk:  
- Take reference from claim experience of Group policy (employer’s employee) where 
PEDs are generally covered from day one and Medical underwriting requirement is 
very rare.  
- Spread the initial expenses over the expected number of insurance policies to be 
sold / renewed in next three years  (say) . This will reduce the expense margin in 
premium, hence a more competitive premium. Get into a multi -year contract 
(minimum three years) with the bank.  
- Try to make the premium as co mpetitive as possible. Contingency margin should be 
minimal. To reduce the uncertainty part, following things can be implemented:  
 Deductible/Co -pay/cap on per claim/low sum insured could be applied(or 
combination of few of them) in policy design to reduce the final claim outgo, 
hence less uncertainty  
 Only cashless policy in preferred network hospitals (unless there is an 
emergency). Pre -defined package rates with hospitals will lessen the uncertainty 
in claim severity cost.  
 May offer family floater policy only instead of individual policy.  
 Some of the Health related pre -existing conditions could be out rightly rejected 
at application stage if mentioned in the proposal form. Basis the declaration in 
proposal form, a tele -underwriting can be performed. Desig n of proposal form is 
key here.  
- Monitor the portfolio at regular interval and take corrective actions as and when 
necessary instead of putting additional contingency margin in pricing. This being a 
group policy gives additional flexibility over a retail pr oduct in terms taking 
corrective action (e.g. pricing revision) quickly.  
- Seek Reinsurer’s help. Get into a Quota share arrangement which will help the 
company to spread the risk and increase Company’s underwriting capacity. 
However, availability of Reinsur ance and any regulatory restriction may be an issue 
here.  
- Reinsurer may also provide technical support in pricing, which may lower the need 
of putting contingency margin in pricing.  
 
                      Volume risk:  
- Competitive pricing will help to build  a decent volume.  
- Discuss with the Bank management and come up with the right marketing and 
selling strategy.  
- Prepare a proper business plan and get the buying from the Bank management. Put 
a maximum cap on business volume.  
- Do a monthly monitoring of the business progress and discuss with Bank 
management as and when required. It has to be a proactive monitoring than 
reactive monitoring.  
- Get a minimum commitment in terms of number of lives from Bank over the next 
one year.  
 
Expense risk:  
- Address the volume  risk to counter the expense risk.  
- Have multiple round of discussions with other stakeholders to get a right level of 
understanding of the associated expenses.  
- Monitor the on -going expenses at monthly level.  
- Outsource some of the non -core activities with p re-agreed cost structure.  
 
 
Capital consideration:  
- If the potential volume is very large relative to size of the company, Board needs to 
be sensitized about the possible course of action,  specially the need of additional 
capital infusion. Capital commitmen t from shareholders will be required before 
taking the final decision.  
- Apart from reducing pricing risk, proportional reinsurance may be helpful here to 
reduce the capital requirement.  
[10] 
iv) 
Morbidity experience of bank customer may differ from rest of the retail product  
experience.  Some possible reasons:  
- Possibility of concentration of risk due to possible high volume and Bank customers 
may have some risk factors in common, due to geography/age/marketing strategy 
which could be different from rest of t he retail segment. E.g. concentration of lives 
in a particular geography which may be prone to a particular disease e.g. Dengue / 
Malaria  
- They may belong to a particular socio -economic status. E.g. people belonging to 
higher socio -economic status  
- If the pr emium charged does not take the actual risk into consideration, e.g. a 
different gender mix in the same age group as compared to rest of the retail 
portfolio  
- Pressure from Bank to honour claims which are in dispute.  
[3] 
 
     v) 
- Proposition is voluntary an d similar to a retail product. Risk premium pricing 
framework of retail product should be the starting point.  
- Adjustment needs to be done to address the following points:  
 Actual morbidity experience of Bank customers with regard to the retail 
product.  
 Asse ss the inherent risk distribution of bank customers and compare that with 
the composition mix in retail product pricing assumptions (e.g. location 
mix/gender mix if location/gender are not considered in premium rating 
structure of the retail product). If t here is a significant difference, do suitable 
adjustment.  
 Apart from the main two change requests, consider the changes in other terms 
and conditions and assess how they may impact the claim frequency and claim 
severity assumptions.  
- PED waiting period waiv er and no medical underwriting  up to 55 years . 
Take a reference from claim experience of group policy pertaining to employer’s 
employee segment where generally PEDs are covered from day one and there is 
no medical underwriting.  
However, we need to keep in  mind that employer’s employee segment is 
generally compulsory in nature; hence chance of anti -selection is minimal here. 
This point can be addressed to an extent by making some changes in product 
proposition like family floater only policy, minimum lives commitment from 
Bank, claim underwriting & monitoring the entire sale process.  
Put additional contingency margin in claim incidence rate and claim severity 
between the age band s 46 to 55.  
- Recognize the overall need of contingency margin in lieu of the unce rtainty of this 
unique proposition and accordingly decide on that.  
- Recognize and analyse the direct fixed expenses and variable expenses with respect 
to this deal. Need to take a call on how much premium will contribute towards 
indirect fixed expenses of t he company. Amortize some of the one -time expenses 
like promotional cost, medical check -up cost, product development cost in system 
etc over multiple years.  
- Risk premium needs to be adjusted for future medical inflation.  
- Risk premium gets loaded by conting ency margin, expenses and profit margin  
- Final premium needs to be adjusted in order to ensure that premium does not 
become too prohibitive for healthier customers to opt for this policy. It can be 
achieved by putting restrictions in policy design (e.g. ded uctible/co -pay/cap on per 
claim etc)  
- Commitment from Bank on a minimum number of lives is extremely important here 
to ensure that pricing and expense assumptions don’t go haywire. Keep monitoring 
the experience and take corrective action as and when requir ed. 
- Technical support from Reinsurer can also be sought.         
[8] 
[36 Marks]  
 
Solution 3:  
i) Reasons for “Care Health” to sell business:  
 Care Health is unable to write  new business  may be due to : 
a. competition in  the market,  
b. poor servicing standards,  
c. constraints on injecting additional capital , 
d.  impact of recent changes in the le gislation  and regulations  
e. bad publicity due to some recent dispute on claim settlement  
f. Poor economic scenario  
 Care Health would like to enter the new business /venture/overseas m arket and wants 
to wind up the existing business.  
 Care Health might not have been generating expected level s of profits to the 
shareholders.   Market is probably at the bottom of insurance cycle.  
 Care health might not have achieved econo mies of scale in run ning the business despite 
being present in the market for many years.  
 There could be threat on solvency and regulator might have intervened to protect the 
policyholders’  intere st. This might have forced the company to sell the business.  
 There could be huge  Asset Liability mism atching risk whi ch ‘Care Health’ might be 
facing. E.g. significant level of mismatching of duration of both assets and liabilities  
Moreover, th ere could be liquidity pressure company may be facing if the claims are 
paid in  the form of regular income to the claimant under both the plans.   
 Promoters want to exit to maximize return on paid -up cap ital. 
 [4] 
ii)  
The following information is required to value on target business  
 
1. Appointed Actuary’s report  on proposed acquisition  
a. Structure of t he company  
b. Information on existing business  
c. Available solvency margin  
d. Experience Analysis -Mortality/Morbidity, Expenses, Persistency  
e. Non -compliance and regulatory penalties in the past, if any  
f. Financial conditions report  
g. Valuation Report  
h. Surplus Analysis  
i. Reserving Methodology and assumptions  
j. Methodology and assumptions used in the  Embedded Value calculations  
k. Movement analysis in the Embedded Value calculations  
l. Any restructuring of the company in the past  
m. Correspondence with Regulators  
i. Proposed agreement an d the communication documents for the intended 
acquisition  
ii. Executive summary of proposed transaction  
 
2. Financial Statements  
a. Annual Returns and accounts  
b. Embedded value calculations  
c. Internal Management Accounts and MIS  
d. Minutes of Board meetings and Committee meetings  
e. Risk management Report  
f. Investment Report  
g. Reports of internal and external auditors  
 
3. Policy information  
a. Distribution channel  
b. Terms and conditions of the policy documents  
c. Sales literature and sales illustration  
d. Underwriting Standards  
e. Reinsurance str ucture  
f. Claim process  
g. Remuneration structure to the  intermediaries  
h. Premium rates and the benefit structure  
i. Third Party administration  
i. Reinsurance arrangements  
ii. Agreements with care homes and nursing homes if any  
 
4. Operational  
a. IT and administration system  
b. Fraud control and compliance process  
c. Corporate Governance  
d. Risk management, underwriting management, claims management  
e. Historic and future business plans  
f. Employee details and HR policy  
g. Customers complaint process  
h. Profiles of senior management team  
[8] 
iii)  
The fi rst step is to calculate the Appraisal Value of the “Care Health” company.  
Appr aisal Value is the  Sum of Embedded Value and the value of expected profit from future new 
business.   
The first step to calculate the embedded value ( EV) of the business where E V is Value of in force 
business + shareholders’ Net Asset.  
If limited information on the existing business is available then it n eeds to set appropriate model 
points based on available information from the “Care Health” business.  Otherwise, consider all t he 
information and data of existing in force business of “Care Health” along  with the net assets 
attributable to shareholders.  
Also assumptions are required to be set for calculation of EV. Assumptions should be the best 
estimate allowing for the expectati on of future trends and inherent  risks and uncertainties in the 
projected cash flows.  
Need to estimate the future new business carefully to compute expected profit from future new 
business  for the calculation of appraisal value . 
[4] 
iv)  
 While valuing the busi ness of “Care Health”, “Care All” might have used best estimat e 
assumptions with some margins built in the assumptions  as “Care All” is a potential buyer . 
 “Care All” might have performed the EV calculations based on few model points whereas 
“Care Health” h as performed the EV calculations on each individual in  force block of 
business.  
 “Care All” may  have considered additional cost to address challenges such as system 
integration, integration of employee HR policy, servicing the existing policyholders of “Car e 
Health” etc.  
 Any form of acquisition is associated with some unknown level of risk. “Care All’’ may have 
considered additional margin in Risk discount rate to address the risk.  
  Shareholders of “Care all” may have different level of expectation with rega rd to return on 
Capital which may have led to assuming higher Risk Discount Rate  in EV calculation . It is also 
possible that “Care Health” might have  used Risk Adjusted Discount Rates by product type s 
whereas “Care All” might have used single Risk Discoun t Rate and vice versa  in the EV 
calculation . 
 “Care all” might have estimated the actuarial assumptions -future expected 
mortality/morbidity, expenses  investment returns, persistency  rate etc. post  considering 
the impact of acquisition on the existing polic y holder s of “Care Health” and their behaviour  
(in terms of say persistency )post acquisition.  
 “Care all” might have different views of future trends in the assumptions used in EV  
calculat ions compared to EV calculations by “Care Health”.  
 Choice of model selection for EV calculations for both companies could be different say 
stochastic  model vs. Deterministic model.  
 EV calculation for ‘’Care Health’’ refers to published figure which is a statutory requirement. 
Such form of requirement is associated with pr udent margin in related assumptions. 
Purpose of EV calculation by “Care All’’ is for acquisition purpose which reflects a different 
view in making assumptions.  
[6] 
v)  
 Reason for sell ing “Care Health”  
 Sole bidder or competing with other insurers  
 Structure of bidding process - e.g. opportunity to revise bid  
 How desperate is the “Care  Health ” company to sell the business  
 Plans for workforce  of “Care  Health ” post winning the bid  
 Expertise available to run the business  
 Integration plans  post winning the bid  
 Data q uality  
 Credit rating of ‘’Care Health’’  
 Cost of acquisition such as cost of the consultant, legal cost,  stamp duty etc. 
 Reaction of stakeholders (Stock market if the company is listed/existing policyholders etc.)  if 
purchase goes ahead  
Reason of purchase?  Potential synergy and benefit, e.g.  
o  Enhancement of Distribution Channel  
o Cross selling  
 Assessment of impact on distribution channels  and branch network  
 How easy or difficult to raise the capital for acquiring the business  
 Opportunity cost of capital  
 View/approval of shareholders of ‘’Care All’’  
 Legal, regulatory and taxation aspects  
 Time to complete the process  
 General economic outlook  
 Market reputation of ‘’Care Health’’ (e.g. number of customer complaints, cases at 
ombudsman etc.)  
[6] 
[28 Marks]  
Solut ion 4:  
i)  
Advantages of introducing Group Critical Illness cover  
 This cover will help to provide financial security for employees in the event of 
contracting a critical illness  (CI). 
 This will help to attract and retain the employees in the organisation.  
 Using weight as one of the factors in deciding the CI cover will encourage employer 
to introduce gymnasium facilities at office and employee to maintain weight over 
time at a sensible level by taking regular exercises.  
 Easier for insurer to estimate the morbi dity risk under critical illness cover as group 
is homogeneous (employer -employee group).  
 Initial expenses under group CI could be lower due to less underwriting and usually 
low levels of commissions to the distributors.  This will help the insurer to charg e 
lower premiums to the employer.  
 Mandatory cover for all employees makes the proposition less risky for insurer.  
 The CI cover formula will reduce automatically  anti selection risk from those with 
very high weights and high aged employees . 
 The formula bein g linked to salary reduces the risk of over insurance.  
 
Disadvantages of introducing Group Critical Illness cover  
 The CI cover formula may not be appreciated by the senior level employees 
(assuming they are nearing  their retirement ages) as the cover for t hem is reducing 
as age is increasing (assuming constant level of salary) . Also very active with 
muscular employees  may be unfairly penalised through the CI cover formula  due to 
weight as one of the parameters for critical illness cover. . 
  The CI cover form ula includes only age and weight as factors  for providing cover to 
the employees ignoring other factors.  Insurer would be exposed to other sources of 
risk e.g. family medical history.  
 Introduction of such CI cover may give extra administrative burden on em ployer. In 
particular, recording the weight of each employee   at the end of every  year and re -
computing the CI cover for each employee. Also employee may not appreciate the 
variability in CI cover (due to change in salary levels, age and weight)  over the years.  
 Insurer may not have full control on the employee data;  in particular weight might 
have been recorded incorrectly and hence might have covered the employee based 
on incorrect weight.  
 Employer might find a simple CI cover structure from other compet itors and hence 
might not appreciate the CI cover formula.  
 The CI cover formula has a high multiple of monthly salary for the young employees 
than the old aged employees. This may not be appreciated by the employer as the 
chance for claiming the CI for you ng aged employees could be lower compared to 
old aged employee.  
 There is no cap on Sum assured coverage amount. In case of a very high salary (e.g. 
senior management), potential sum insured exposure could be very high.  
 Formula can produce negative number.   
 There may be misinterpretation by employer/employee with regard to CI definition. 
Employee may be under the impression that all form of CIs will be covered. 
Rejection of claim due to policy definition may impact the relationship with Insurer 
leading to l apse of the Group policy at renewal.   
    [6] 
  
ii)  
Underwriting   
 It would req uire initial underwriting such as declaration of health status .  
 Specific PEDs not covered in the policy.  
  Requiring HR declaration such as employees to be “Active at Work”.  
 There i s a set “Free Cover Limit” above which more underwriting is carried out.  
Moreover, premiums may have impact on level of free cover limit. Eg insurer may 
charge comparatively different level of premiums if the free cover limit is very high 
and vice versa.  
 Underwriting can be performed  at claims level  (Back end underwriting)  wherein pre -
existing conditions are excluded for claiming the benefits.  
 Reinsurance can also assist in designing the underwriting policy of the insurer.   
 Appropriate policy wording.   
 
Pitfalls of underwriting  
 False health declaration could be a major risk.  
 Claim based moratorium underwriting may lead to reputational risk (if claim is 
denied basis wrong health declaration) and employer may be forced to lapse policy 
at renewal.  Stricter p olicy wording may lead to same problem.  
 Insurer needs to obtain indication of ages and weights at the outset in order to 
allocate the member to the correct underwriting category.  Insurer will also need to 
obtain this information at each policy anniversary for each member.  It is difficult to 
check false statement of weights of the  employees.  
 Too much emphasis /reliance  on HR provided information  which may be wrong.  
 It is difficult to set the one unique single formula for Free Cover Limit (FCL) which is 
applic able across all employee -employer groups.  
 Medical underwriting will impose additional administration hassle. It also leads to 
incurring additional cost.  
[8] 
  
iii)  
Advantages:  
 PMI cover can be provided on indemnity basis subject to a maximum cover as per 
the formula mentioned.  It seeks to provide compensation for cost of medical 
treatment. A group policy may cover in -patient/outpatient/ day care treatment, 
nursing at home, transportation by private ambulance etc.  It provides a wider 
coverage as compared to Gro up CI cover.  
 Employers can use the PMI cover not only as a perk, and also to get employees back 
to work and keep them healthy and productive.  
 Family members (dependents ) are  also generally covered, which gives peace of mind 
to the employee.  
 Insurer is expe cted to have higher level of c onfidence in pricing assumption s. 
 PMI cover can be offered to employees of the large group on a “Medical History 
Disregarded” basis.  
 As it’s voluntary, scope of anti -selection is limited.  
 
Disadvantages:  
 In CI cover, the form of benefits gives the beneficiary ultimate choice over what 
he/she wants to do with the lump sum, whereas in PMI cover benefits must be 
taken in the form of treatment.  
 PMI cover is expected to be more expensive for the employer.  
 It leads to more administra tion hassle:  
-  Requires expert staff and specialist systems  
- Building cashless network across Pan India  
- Managing the TPA if claim administration is outsourced  
 Chance of fraud is higher here.  
 
Underwriting:  
 Requiring HR declaration such as employees to be “Ac tive at Work”.  
 There is a set “Free Cover Limit” above which more underwriting is carried out. 
Moreover, premiums may have impact on level of free cover limit. Eg insurer 
may charge comparatively different level of premiums if the free cover limit is 
very high and vice versa.  
 Putting certain restrictions in policy conditions like  
- Per day ro om rent cap  
- Co-payment at the time of  claim  
- Co-payment at the time of  claim for Parents  
- Exclude parents from coverage  
- Excess/Deductible  
 Entry and exit criteria must be c learly defined e.g. new employees may be 
required to serve a waiting period of 3 months.  
 By pre -authorizing claims (except accidental and emergency cases)  
 In family plan, employees must not have option to choose dependents  
 Relationship of dependent with em ployee must be clearly defined (e.g. Spouse, 
son, daughter, parents, parents -in-law)  
Pitfalls of underwriting:  
 Stricter terms and conditions are not liked by employer/employees  
 Too much reliance on HR provided information which may be incorrect  
 Collection of information like weight in order to calculate Free -cover limit  will 
impose additional administrative pressure and risk as well due to potential error 
in data  
[8] 
 
iv)  
 If group CI cover is offered on voluntary basis then there is a high risk of ‘anti -select ion’. 
Hence, pricing should consider this factor.  
 If the cover is on voluntary basis then minimum number of participation of employees is 
required to spread the morbidity risk  and to avoid the mismatch between actual expenses 
and expected expenses assumed  in pricing  
 Different level of “Free Cover Limit” is set of the group CI cover is on voluntary basis.  Pricing 
will depend on the level of ‘’Free cover’’ given.  
 Premium should be competitive enough to avoid anti -selection and selective lapsing .  
 Level of pr e-acceptance underwriting: W hether underwriting process  will be robust  enough 
to counter anti -selection e.g. whether there will be close enrolment period for existing 
employees or whether new employees will be subject to a n initial waiting period  or a 
proc ess of having form with self-declaration ). 
That  will also drive the level of  contingency margin which will be required in pricing 
assumptions.  
 Presence or absence of PED conditions will have an impact on pricing.  
 Disclosure rate in proposal form will be a risk which needs to be kept in mind while pricing 
the policy.  
 Volume estimation is a big risk in any voluntary scheme. If volume is expected to be lower 
than estimated, insurer will not be able to recoup its initial fixed expenses. It also leads to 
high vo latility in claim experience.  
 Insurer will not have a fair idea about the overall risk profile of insured beneficiaries in 
advance  which may impact the pricing.  
 [6] 
[28 Marks]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
**********************  
 
 
