 
Institute of Actuaries of India  
 
 
Subject SA1 – Health and Care Insurance 
 
 
May 2011 Examination  
 
INDICATIVE SOLUTION  
 
 
 
Introduction   
The indicative solution has been written by the Exa miners with the aim of helping candidates. The 
solutions given are only indicative.  It is realize d that there could be other points as valid answers  and 
examiner have given credit for any alternative appr oach or interpretation which they consider to be 
reasonable 
 
 
 
 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 2 of 11 
 Q.1]  
(a)  
 
• Premium increase  
 
• Bad service (slow policy issuance, late claim payme nt, poor call center experience, bad 
reputation) 
 
• Better fitting product offered by the competition  
 
(b)  
 
• Claim free bonus, e.g. increased sum insured  
 
• Coverage of pre-existing conditions 
 
• Coverage of specific illnesses 
 
• Coverage of pregnancy 
 
 
(c) 
 
Practical challenges are non-standardized definitio ns and non-standardized benefits in the market. 
For instance different rules for sum insured bonus in case of claim free years. Different definitions for 
pre-existing conditions or different exclusion clau se related to pre-existing conditions.   
 
Alternative examples provided by the candidate shou ld be of similar importance as the example 
above.  
 
 
i.  The insured can assume that he will be accepted as a standard risk by any other health 
insurer since he is healthy. Hence, change of the i nsurer will be easier since accrued rights 
will not get lost, e.g. coverage of pre-existing co nditions, or claim free bonus will be 
transferred to the new contract. Hence the healthy insured can change to the insurer of his 
choice because the new insurer is cheaper or provid es the better service, etc.  
 
ii.  The insured must assume that he will not be accepte d as standard risk – due to his health 
condition and hence he may get confronted with a di scouraging offer from competitors.  This 
makes it likely that the insured will stay in the e xisting portfolio. In case insurer is losing more 
healthy risks – which is likely when he increases p remiums  or because of lacking service – 
the premium for the remaining portfolio, e.g. the c hronically sick insured  – may need to 
even further increase.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 3 of 11 
 (d)  
 
Risks: 
 
− Increased anti-selective lapse as described under c ) especially when premiums are required 
to be adjusted. Anti-selective lapse means that the  healthier part of the insured population is 
tending to lapse due to the reasons explained under  c).  
 
− Hence, obligation to write more fresh business to k eep the risk profile of the portfolio at the 
same level and cope with the increased anti-selecti ve lapse.  
 
− Additional complexity in underwriting to cope with the accrued rights of changing 
policyholders. 
 
− Substantially increased administration expenses sin ce  product specific rules like waiting 
periods, claim free bonuses ,etc. are not followed in case of changing customers. 
 
− Risk of not being able to recover initial expenses with the renewal experience less predictable 
and quite sensitive. 
 
− Increased risk of fraud and error, e.g. accrued rig hts may be stated wrongly by the insured, 
etc.  
 
− Increased pricing risk since portfolio is more expo sed to competitor’s behavior, new product 
launch can lead to sudden and unexpected anti-selec tive lapse, etc.  
 
 
 
Chances: 
 
− Strong incentive to provide good services and keep the premiums low by underwriting and 
claims management. Improved reputation e.g. industr ial service and underwriting standards 
should improve.  
 
− Companies successful in this regard can capture mor e quickly market share and bit the 
competition. 
 
 
(e) 
• The insurance companies own underwriting policy cou ld be violated by the regulatory 
change. Companies with efficient underwriting appro ach and good service standards could 
now attract sub-standard risks without getting the adequate premium as per the companies 
risk assessment.  
 
• Hence, the chances of the regulatory change could b e shifted to companies with less 
favorable claims service standards – since less hea lth or chronically sick insured’s may tend 
to change the insurer in that case.  This could all ow those companies to keep premiums low 
and attract more new/healthy risks.  
 
[Marks – 24] 
 
 
 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 4 of 11 
  
Q.2] 
a)  
 
• Pro:   Client friendly feature and hence product easier to sell. 
 
• Pro:    Cashless feature requires contractual relationsh ip to providers, e.g. a provider network.  
  
The claims pre-authorization process bears basicall y the chance to control claims better. Pre-
agreed fee schedules or package rates allow the ins urer to manage the ongoing medical 
inflation better.  
 
• Pro:   A quality provider network provides the opportuni ty to use their  brand to help tosell 
the product accordingly. 
 
• Con:   Cashless feature may increase the utilization by insured’s, hence higher claims costs. 
 
• Con:   Cashless feature may increase the risk of fraud a nd misuse – since an additional party is 
involved in claims settlement. 
 
 
b)  
 
The candidate needs to evaluate if the pros or cons  are dominating as per his assessment.  Three 
points for a consistent and logical explanation.   
 
One extra point if the advice provided is a concret e solution and discusses additional product 
features like deductibles, co-insurance, sub-limits , network management and claims management 
which could mitigate the risks of the cashless faci lity.  
 
[Marks – 9] 
 
 
Q.3]  
 
(a) 
 
• Data Risk:   Inaccurate, inadequate or incomplete data can lea d to wrong actuarial 
conclusions or policy of claims underwriting decisi ons. 
 
• Pricing Risk/Wrong Assumptions (including model ris k, parameter risk and random 
fluctuation risk). 
 
• Counterparty risk related inter alia related to dis tribution partners, reinsurers, TPA’s and 
providers. 
 
• Risk regarding regulatory and taxation changes. 
 
• Reputational Risk. 
 
• Any type of operational risk (internal fraud, physi cal risk in case of catastrophes – IT recovery, 
etc.). 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 5 of 11 
  
• Aggregation and concentration risk due specializati on of products (covering inpatient claims 
only) or distribution related concentration. 
 
• Catastrophes like war, nuclear disaster, epidemics or pandemics. 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
• Pricing Risk:   Data quality is generally problematic due to rath er limited regulations on 
provider billing.  In addition many insurance compa nies deal with different TPA’s which 
increases the risk of inconsistent data within the insurance company’s portfolio. In case of 
group business, even the age or gender distribution  of covered dependents are not known, 
which increases the pricing risk drastically.  
 
• Counterparty Risk:   Many companies have outsourced provider network m anagement and 
claims processing to TPA’s. This bears additional c ounterparty risk – as compared to non-
health insurance companies. 
 
• Pandemic and Epidemic Risk:   Health Insurers are especially exposed to this type  of risk. 
SARS, SWINE Flu have been pandemic threats in the p ast. The exposure of stand-alone health 
companies carrying only morbidity risk is especiall y high to this risk.   
 
• Risk related to Regulatory changes and changes in t axation are generally higher in emerging 
insurance scenarios since markets and regulation ar e both emerging. Examples for this risk 
are the regulatory change in regard of portability of accrued rights and TDS obligations in 
case of cashless payments.  
 
• Reputational Risk:   Huge premium adjustments of more than 100% after less than 2 years 
after policy launch because of pricing or underwrit ing mistake, claims denials due to lack of 
transparency in policy wording regarding benefits a nd exclusions, namely pre-existing 
conditions and miss selling lead to maximum number of ombudsman related complaints and 
often bad feedback in press and TV.  
 
Other risks and examples are acceptable as long as a valid and logical explanation is provided along 
with a valid example.  
 
[Marks -17] 
 
 
 
Q.4] 
 
i.                            
 
ii.                        
 
iii.                       
 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 6 of 11 
 iv.                        
 
(Above formula is given in order to be consistent w ith other formulae; alternative formula 
based on GWP and lives underwritten is also accepta ble) 
 
v.    
                     
 
Relation:  
 
From i, ii and iii above:   
 
From iii, iv and v above:  
         
 
Total Claim Amount, ERP, Earned Premium, etc. shoul d belong to the same period. The definition of 
Claim Amount or No. of Claims should be consistent across, i. e., Paid, Paid plus Outstanding or 
including IBNR. 
 
[Marks – 7] 
 
 
Q.5]  
 
a)  Usual, Customary & Reasonable (UCR) Charges:   An amount customarily charged for or 
covered for similar services and supplies which are  medically necessary, recommended by a 
doctor, or required for treatment. It means that th e charge is the provider’s usual fee for a 
service that does not exceed the customary fee in t hat geographic area, and is reasonable 
based on the circumstances. Conventional indemnity plans operate based on usual, 
customary, and reasonable (UCR) charges.  
 
b)  Preferred Provider Network:   Preferred Provider Network is a network of health care service 
providers with which an insurance company has negot iated contracts for its insured 
customers to receive healthcare services at discoun ted costs. The insured may go outside the 
network, but would incur larger costs in the form o f higher deductibles, higher coinsurance 
rates, or non-discounted charges from the providers . 
 
c)  Age-at-entry pricing:  “Age-at-entry pricing” refers to the practice in s ome markets of 
calculating premiums for PMI products with due allo wance for the increasing age of the 
policyholder over the prospective period of cover. Premiums do not increase because of the 
policyholder’s increasing age and insurance company  keeps special reserve to smooth out 
the results over a period of time known as “Aging R eserve”. The insurer usually retains the 
right to increase premiums subsequently to allow fo r medical inflation or medical inflation in 
excess of levels assumed in the original calculatio n.  
 
d)  Community Rating:   Community rating refers to the practice of chargi ng all policyholders the 
same premium rate irrespective of rating factors su ch as age, sex, medical status, claims 
history, etc. This practice may sometime expose the  insurance company to adverse selection. 
 
 
[Marks – 4]  
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 7 of 11 
 Q.6]  
                    
a)  Policy Year Loss Ratio:  Policy Year basis means segregation of all premiums  attributable to 
policies having an inception or renewal date within  a given twelve-month period and losses 
relating to those same policies whenever they may o ccur. In other words, the total value of 
all losses (including reserves if any) arising from  (regardless of when reported) policies 
incepting or renewing during the year is divided by  the fully developed earned premium for 
those same policies to calculate underwriting year loss ratio. The finally developed earned 
premium will always equal the written premium for t hose policies. This is sometime also 
known as Underwriting Year Loss Ratio. 
 
 
b)  Reasons of upward trend in Policy Year Loss Ratio:   The following could be the reasons for 
upward trend in the loss ratio on policy year basis  given in the question: 
 
• Anti Selection on Renewal  - It is quite possible that people with comparative ly poor 
health are renewing their policies which is causing  the deterioration of the portfolio 
performance. 
 
• Effect of initial Underwriting  - The positive impact of medical and other underwri ting 
withers off in few years time pushing the loss rati o upward. 
 
• Medical Inflation  - The medical inflation will result in deterioratio n of loss ratios if 
there is no corresponding rate increase to counter the same 
 
• Waiting Periods & Exclusions  - Some of the inpatient indemnity health insurance 
products come with certain exclusions of benefits d uring first few years of the policy. 
With subsequent renewals of policies the policyhold ers start availing those benefits 
resulting in increase in incidence rates and thus l oss ratio deterioration. 
 
These are the main reasons for upward trend in Poli cy Year Loss Ratio.  
There can be an interplay of other factors also lik e, increase in general morbidity, outbreak of 
disease, change in business mix, random fluctuation , etc. along with factors mentioned above that 
can be responsible for the upward trend in Policy Y ear Loss Ratio as observed in the example given 
above. 
 
 
c)  The main limitation of using Policy Year as basis o f monitoring the portfolio performance is 
that it takes longer time for experience to fully d evelop. Apart from this, policy year extends 
to two calendar years and, therefore, it is not ver y good measure to track frequency and 
severity trend, e. g., inflation.  
 
[Marks – 8] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 8 of 11 
  
Q.7] 
 
Long Term Care includes all forms of continuing per sonal or nursing care and associated domestic 
services for people who are unable to look after th emselves without some degree of support, 
whether provided in their own homes, at a day centr e, or care home setting. 
 
Long-term care covers a very wide spectrum of needs . Some people only require a small amount of 
assistance to be fully independent, whilst others c ould not function without high levels of care. An 
optimal long-term care programme would be designed to help people regain as much independence 
as possible, slow down the rate of deterioration an d provide the necessary care support and 
environment to maintain well being.  
 
The costs of care can be divided between living cos ts, housing costs and personal care. 
 
The demand for private long-term care insurance is driven by the need to have 
 
• security 
• independence 
• choice and 
• dignity 
 
in older age.     
 
 
The following are the important demographic, politi cal and social factors that have bearing on the 
demand for Long Term Care Insurance product in Indi a: 
 
a)  State Provision:  Availability of protection from State is an import ant consideration for any 
insurance product which is even more applicable in case of LTCI given its nature. If we 
analyse the past practice and present trends in Sta te provision in India, it is clear that Long 
Term Care has not been very high in the agenda of C entral and State Governments. There are 
a few schemes running for care of old aged but eith er these are mean tested or the benefits 
are too low to take care of needs of old aged in mi ddle class. Moreover, given the stress on 
Public Finance, it is not expected that the situati on will change drastically on this front in 
near future. Therefore, on this ground there is nee d for LTCI kind of products in India. 
 
b)  Non-Governmental Organizations:  There are a few Non-Governmental Organizations 
(NGO’s) helping the old age people in need in the c ountry. But their reach is restricted in 
regional areas and they may not have enough means t o make a difference at a very large 
level. The concept of ‘Old-Age Societies’ has not g ained popularity in India as in some other 
developed counties. This again goes in favor of LTC I products. 
 
 
c)  Informal Care:  This is one of the most important considerations t o assess the need of LTCI in 
India. Historically, Indian society structure is su ch that the care to old people is provided in 
family whenever there is any need. Children feel th at it is their moral duty to provide care to 
their parents and grandparents and are committed to  this emotionally, physically and 
financially. This reduces the need of LTCI which pr ovides formal care and financial support in 
case of need in old age. But as we would notice lat er in few points down the line, this trend is 
slowly changing. 
 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 9 of 11 
 d)  Age Composition:  The median age in India is still less than that of  many other countries and 
therefore we do not expect a huge jump in old aged people in near future. So, collectively no 
massive pressure is expected on resources, but at a n individual level it is better to start 
provisioning for old age in the form of LTCI. Trend  in age composition is also an indication of 
expected volume of such product. 
 
e)  Longevity:  We have seen that mortality is becoming lighter in  old ages for better availability 
of health care facilities (amongst other things). T his trend is expected to continue in future as 
well and should result in pushing the demand for LT CI product. 
 
f)  Nuclear Families:  In last couple of decades the size of families is reducing very fast. Now-a-
days, couples go for one child of maximum two child ren. Moreover, for various reasons some 
people prefer Nuclear Family to Joint Family. All t his will reduce the availability of informal 
care and will push the demand for LTCI product. 
 
g)  Health Consciousness:  People are becoming more and more health conscious  which will on 
the one hand delay the need of having long-term car e, but on the other hand make them feel 
more responsible for their future needs in the old age. 
 
h)  Rapid Growth of Middle Class:  LTCI is mainly targeted towards middle class becau se rich 
people can always pay from their pockets in case of  need and poor people have other 
pressing priorities rather than paying premium for LTCI. With rise of middle class the 
prospects of LTCI look good in future. 
 
i)  Sophistication in Choice:  People are becoming more demanding and would like to have the 
best care for themselves in the old age too. High d isposable income coupled with fastidious 
attitude should increase the demand for LTCI. 
 
j)  Self dependence and dignity:  There is trend towards financial independence and people who 
are earning well would not like to depend on their children in the old ages. This also shows 
that there is need for LTCI product. 
 
Some of these social and demographic trends are at their nascent stage and may take time to be fully 
visible, but since LTCI is a product with long term  horizon (especially pre-funded version), it will b e 
better to move early from the point of view of both  insurer and insured. 
 
 
[Marks – 10] 
Q.8]  
 
a) 
 
The calculation of required rate change is as follo ws: 
 
Particulars 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
1. Earned Premium (Provided)  435  1438  1954 
2. Reported Claims (Provided)  298  904  1293 
3. Loss Development Factors (Provided)  1.000  1.02 1  1.178 
4. IBNR [(2) X {(3)-1}]  0  19  230 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 10 of 11 
 5. Ultimate Claims [(2) + (4)]  298  923  1523 
6. Trend Factor 1  1.545  1.403  1.274 
7. Trended Claims [(5) X (6)]  461  1295  1940 
8. Projected Loss Ratio [(7) / (1)]  106%  90%  99%  
9. Overall Projected Loss Ratio[∑(7) /∑(1)]      96 .6% 
10. Target Loss Ratio 2      70.0% 
11. Required Rate Change [(9) / (10) - 1]      37.9 % 
 
 
1 The calculation of trend factor is given below: 
 
Particulars 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
1. Mid of experience period 10/1/2008  10/1/2009  10/1/2010  
2. Mid of coverage period 3/31/2013  3/31/2013  3/31/2013  
3. Length of Trend in years [(2) - (1)] 4.50  3.50  2.50  
4. Annual Frequency Trend 2%  2%  2%  
5. Annual Severity Trend 8%  8%  8%  
6. Trend Factor [{1+(4)}X{1+(5)}]^(3) 1.545  1.403  1.274  
 
As the revised premium rates will be valid for poli cies written till 31.3.2013 (which will be effectiv e 
till 31.3.2014), the coverage period is from 1 st  April 2012 to 31 st  March 2014. Therefore, mid of 
coverage period is 31 st  March 2013 as given above. 
 
2 Target Loss Ratio = 1 - (Expense + Profit) = 1 - ( 10% + 10% + 5% + 5%) = 70% 
 
 
b) 
 
This kind of methodology is appropriate where the o verall adjustment in existing rates is required. 
This is the case when there is no cross subsidy (in tentional or unintentional) in various plans. The 
single overall rate adjustment is required only to account for trend in utilization, inflation, expens es, 
etc. that impact the different plans uniformly.  
 
The other approach is to divide the overall data in  different sub groups based on rating factors, such  
as, sum insured, age bands, gender, geography, etc and determine the risk premium for each cell 
separately. To decide on no. of sub classification,  a trade off is achieved between accuracy and 
credibility of data. Then the gross premium is dete rmined for each of the sub groups by applying 
relevant loading for expenses. This kind of approac h is appropriate where the experience of different 
plans and sub plans is expected to be different and  the price cannot be adjusted by a uniform factor. 
In this method, multivariate analysis is also appli ed in case there are many rating factors. 
 
 
c) 
 
IAI                                                          ________          SA1 0511  
 Page 11 of 11 
 As per our calculation given in 8a) we expect a los s ratio of 70% for the coverage period after 
increasing our premium rates by 37.9%. As a matter of fact, the actual performance of the portfolio is  
a function of various factors that interact with ea ch other in a very complex way, for example, 
expectation of policyholders, availability of other  alternatives, outlook about health insurance, 
reaction of competitors, actual realization of tren d assumptions, etc. The major worry about 
increasing rates by close to 38% is the risk of sel ective lapsing. It is quite possible that unhealthy  
policyholders decide to pay increased premium as th ey may fear of not getting cover elsewhere. 
While comparatively healthy people may decide not t o renew their policies with the present insurer. 
They may be confident of finding health cover with some other insurance company or may decide to 
not take health insurance cover at all. This will r esult in deteriorating performance of the portfolio  
and the calculated rate increase may not be enough.  In order to avoid this kind of situation, small 
increases in premium on regular intervals should be  preferred to a few big corrections. 
 
 
 
d) 
 
 
 
 
[Marks – 21] 
[Total Marks – 100] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
****************************** 
