 
 
Institute of Actuaries of India  
 
 
 
Subject SA1 – Health and Care 
Insurance  
 
 
 
May 2013 Examinations  
 
 
INDICATIVE SOLUTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 2 
 Solution 1 : - 
IRDA has come up with recent guidelines covering various aspects of health insurance (i.e., product 
features, s tandardisation of forms and definition, TPA, etc.) The following are the main changes that 
have been introduced through these guidelines:  
1. IRDA has prescribed standard definition of main terms used in health insurance; for instance, 
deductible, hospital, pr e-existing disease, congenital anomaly, subrogation, portability, etc. 
which all insurance companies need to follow to will bring uniformity.  
 
2. Standard definitions of major critical illness diseases have been provided by the regulator.  
 
3. It has prescribed t he disclosure that insurance companies need to incorporate in the 
prospectus and policy wording.  
 
4. Regulator has also prescribed the declaration that prospect needs to sign in the proposal 
form.  
 
5. Various forms such as cashless request and claim form, etc. h ave been standardized.  
 
6. Premium Rates needs to be calculated based on the completed age of each policyholder as 
on the date of inception / renewal for individual policies.   For FF policies it needs to be 
based on the incidence rates of all family members covered.  
 
7. Loading / discount on renewal premiums can be based on the increase and decrease of 
premiums of the entire portfolio and not on individual claim experience.  
 
8. Entry age of all health insurance products should be at least 65 years.  
 
9. There shall not  be any exit age beyond which renewal of health insurance policy is not 
available.  
 
10. There should be a provision of free look period of 15 days in all products.  
 
11. At least 50% of Cost of Pre Insurance Health Check Up should be borne by the insurance 
compani es in case the policy is accepted.  
 
12. If the claim event falls between two policy periods, the claims shall be paid taking into 
consideration the available sum insured in both the policies and in case premiums of second 
year not yet paid, the same shall be a djusted against the claim amount and balance money 
paid to the policy holder.  
 
13. Cumulative bonus in case of claim will be reduced at the same rate at which it is accrued.  
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 3 
 14. Change in Premium and TPA needs to be informed to existing policy holders 3 months an d 
30 days in advance.  
 
15. Insurance companies are required to set up a separate channel for addressing health 
insurance related claims and grievances of senior citizens.  
 
16. Claims to be settled within 30 days of receipt of all documentation of claims.  
 
17. If a per son has purchased more than one indemnity policy from the same or different 
insurance companies, policyholder shall have the right to get his claim settled under any 
policy of his choice where the claim is below the sum assured limit, and in case the claim  is 
above sum insured limit, contribution clause will be applicable.  
 
18. IRDA has prescribed a comprehensive list of items that can be disallowed by the insurance 
company while processing claims. However, insurer may choose not to disallow some of the 
items f rom the list but may not disallow any item which is not mentioned there.  
 
19. Appointed Actuary is supposed to review all the products at least once in a year and take 
corrective actions if any.  
 
20. After five years of product approval Appointed Actuary shall rev iew the performance of the 
product in terms of morbidity, lapse, inflation, expenses, etc. and compare with the original 
assumptions made while pricing the product and seek fresh approval with suitable 
justifications or modifications of the earlier assumpt ions made.  
 
The most important point is that all the changes will be applicable for all the existing and new 
products.  Existing products are required to be re -filed within stipulated time to meet the 
requirements.  
 
This will result in a level playing fie ld unlike the past practice where the guidelines were  applicable 
for only new products or at the time of re -filing of existing.   
 (Total 15 M arks)  
  
Solution 2 : - 
2.1  Ages of the members  
 Annual Sum Insured limit  
 Number of members in the family  
 Type of produ ct – indemnity or fixed benefit  
 Other pricing assumptions   
 
 
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 4 
 2.2  
(a) Positive selection or lack of anti -selection:  
- Current portfolio may have shown experience of lower claim incidence rate in 
floater plans compared to similar individual plans.  
- Possibility of  existence of positive selection is expected to be higher at certain 
age bands and become more prominent after the PED waiting period is over.  
- Individual vs. Group - comparisons of individual incidence rates and claim cost 
compared to group incidence and c laims cost in other markets to draw 
conclusion about the selection effect and its possible impact on FF Discounts.  
- Selection effect depends on the product coverage:  
•  Lower for accident only products  
• Higher for indemnity products with comprehensive cove r 
•  Highest for CI only products which covers chronic diseases  
- The lower incidence rate effect can be passed on to premium rates as ‘discount 
on Individual premium rate.  
  
 
(b) Higher propensity to ‘burn out’ the sum insured (SI) limit:  
- Need to check the factors and probability of an individual claim above SI Limit?  
 It depends on product benefit e.g. room type allowed, benefits covered, On 
age, higher the age, more the chances of a claim above SI Limit  
- Need to check the factors and probability of more than  one member in a policy 
claim in the same policy year?  
 Again, it depends on age, for two lives in a policy, independent of each other 
with probability of claim P1 and P2, the probability of both claiming in the 
same year is P1 * P2  
 The higher the chances o f multiple claims in a year, higher should be the 
discounts, so, the discount should be higher for higher ages.  
- Need to check the overall probability of the total claim by all members in a 
family floater policy is more than SI limit?  
 The probability that t otal claims will go beyond SI Limit in a policy is more 
than the sum of probabilities (of total claim beyond SI Limit) of individual 
members.  
 The effect results into the discount due to sum insured capping effect.  
  
 
(c) Lower expense loading:  
 Margin for operating expenses include:  
- Policy administration expenses  – issuance, query handling, endorsements etc, 
and these costs are linked to number of policies. Hence per member cost should 
be lower in a floater policy than in an individual policy.  
- Claim handlin g expenses  - these expenses per member may be lower due to 
lower claim incidence rate.  
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 5 
 - Underwriting expenses  - underwriting cost may be lower if the rejection ratio in 
floater policies is lower than in Individual policies. Do we have such an 
experience?  
  
 
(d) Other Reasons:   
- Better persistency  
- Customer life time value  
- Persistency increases as number of members in the family increase?  
- Lesser frauds  
- Discretionary discounts to make floater a better proposition for customers  
  
 
2.3  
(a) Solution approach using sto chastic modeling:  
  Simulate the gross claim amount for each member in the individual plan  
  Calculate the net claim for each member for SI cap  
  This gives the pure claim cost for each member for given SI  
  For family floater plan, simulate the gross claim amoun t for each member.  
  In step 1, summing the gross claim amounts for all members gives the gross 
claim amount for the family  
  Get the net claim for the family by applying the SI cap  
  This gives the pure claim cost for floater SI  
   
Comparing the pure claim cost i n step 3 with the total of step 7 gives the 
discount% applicable.  
  
  [Total 15 marks]  
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 6 
 Solution 3 : - 
 
3.1 
 Leveraged trend - 
   Wkg 1  
  15%  Wkg 2  
  
Cumm 
Fre Freq 
(a) Annual 
Claims  Member 
Cost (b)  Plan Cost 
(c) Plan Cost × 
Freq (d)  Inflated 
Claims (e)  Member 
Cost (f)  Plan Cost 
(g) Plan Cost 
× Freq (h)  
0.6 0.6                  
-                   -                   -                          -                     -                   -                   -                   -    
0.75  0.15               
500             500                 -                          -                 575             575                 -                   -    
0.85  0.1           
1,000          1,000                 -                          -              1,150          1,045             105                11  
0.9 0.05            
2,500          1,450          1,050                       53            2,875          1,500          1,375                69  
0.95  0.05            
8,000          1,500          6,500                     325            9,200          1,500          7,700             385 
1 0.05         
18,000          1,500       16,500                     825         20,700          1,500       19,200             960  
Total  
                   1,203  
           1,424  
 
Leveraged Trend = 1 424 / 1203 = 118.4%  
 
Wkg1, Member Cost:  
 Deductible Cost: Rs. 1,000/ - 
 Min (Annual Claim, Deductible Cost) + Maximum (Annual Claims Less:  Deductible i.e. Rs 
1,000/ -, 0) x Co payment (30%)  
 
Wkg2, Member Cost:  
 Deductible Cost: Rs. 1,000/ - 
 Min (Inflated Claims, Deductible Cost) + Maximum (Annual Claims Less:  Deductible i.e. Rs 
1,000/ -, 0) x Co payment (30%)  
 
3.2  
  
Anti-selection is the general effect of potential policyholders making use of information 
that is not available to the insurer, and so taking out cover on favourable terms. For 
example, people that think they are more likely to claim on an insurance contract tend 
to be the ones that take out those contracts.   
 
  
Anti-selection can be reasonable if, for example, the insurer does not ask for (or use) 
sufficient information required to accurately determine an applicant’s risk of claiming.  
  
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 7 
   
Non -disclosure occurs in the specific circumstance where the applicant is asked to give 
the insurer details of information relevant to th e risk, but fails to disclose such 
information.   
 
  
Deliberate non -disclosure may result in claims not being paid. Negligent non -disclosure 
may result in the benefit being reduced.   
 
 
3.3   There are two distinct purposes here:  
  
At the onset of a claim, an investigation should be made as to the cause of the claim. 
This may be, for example, to spot any trends, e.g. epidemics, early so that action can be 
taken if necessary.  
  
General monitoring at set intervals to see more gradual trends appearing, for example a 
decrease in claims costs due to medical advances.  
 
The impact of anti -selection, non -disclosure and early claims is difficult to estimate. The 
actuary will first compare actual claims against those expected at early durations; this will 
not be entirely  rigorous as the divergence may simply be the consequence of the inaccuracy 
or irrelevance of the data used to price the products in the first instance.  
 
 The actuary will next compare his office’s experience with that of the market generally, 
 where inc idence data by duration is available; adjustment may be needed for differing policy 
 conditions and target clientele. Statistics from overseas or the population may be helpful, 
 but their relevance needs to be examined and results treated with due caution.  
 
 On non -disclosure and anti -selection, the actuary will examine the questions asked at the 
 underwriting stage and the particular methods employed by the distributor and compare 
 these with practices elsewhere in the marketplace. This will act as a guide  to the potential 
 for impact.   
 [Total 20 M arks]
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 8 
 Solution 4 : - 
 
1.  
Rating Factor:  Rating factor refers to the factor that affects premium for an insurance 
coverage. In case of health insurance, rating factors are characteristics of an insured that 
determine s the premium to be charged. For example, in most of the health insurance 
policies premium is determined by age of insured, therefore, age can be termed as a rating 
factor.   
 
2. Following are the common rating factors that are prevalent in India for retail h ealth 
inpatient indemnity product:  
   
1. Age or Age -band:  Age clearly has influence on both the frequency and severity of 
claim. Hence, age of insured is one of the important rating factors. In some of the 
products age is grouped in bands and premium remains same in a specific age band. 
Wider age bands make premium table look simpler but at the same time 
compromises on the impact of age as a rating factor.  
 
2. Sum Insured:  Sum insured signifies the amount up to which the insurer will cover 
claims in a period of o ne year. Since, in inpatient indemnity health insurance product 
prevalent in India the sum -insured varies quite widely, it becomes another 
important rating factor.  
 
3. Location (Metro/ Non -metro):  Although location is not widely used as a rating factor 
in Ind ia, some insurance companies do charge different rates based on residence of 
the insured. Generally, cities are grouped in few categories based on the health care 
cost and different premium is charged to policyholders residing in different group of 
cities.   
 
4. Claim History:  Some companies vary renewal premium based on the fact whether 
insured has claimed in the last policy year or not. Thus claim history becomes a 
rating factor in such cases.  
 
 
3. Following are the potential rating factors that can be introduce d for retail health inpatient 
indemnity product in India:  
 
1. Gender:  Gender is being used as a rating factor in some of the countries and known 
to have impact of health care cost. Therefore, it can be explored as an additional 
rating factor, especially, when  used in conjunction with age.  
 
2. Occupation/ Profession:  Insured employed in different occupations may be exposed 
to different kind of risks. For example, those who are involved in white -collar jobs 
may have sedentary life -style and therefore more prone to disease related to 
specific lifestyle. On the other hand, people who are engaged in blue -collar jobs may 
be more exposed to hazardous activities and may show different morbidity 
behaviour . Thus, occupation of insured may have considerable influence on over all 
health care cost.  
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 9 
  
3. Medical History:  Most of the products prevalent in India use medical history of the 
insured as a criterion for accepting or rejecting policy. However, it can be used for 
premium determination also equally effectively.  
 
4. Region:  India is a very vast country with varying climate and living conditions which 
have noteworthy impact on incidence of disease. Moreover, the cost of health care 
may differ in different states and zones. Therefore, region may be used as one of the 
rating factor. P lease note that it is different from location (Metro/ Non -metro) 
mentioned above.  
 
5. Habits:  Habits can be healthy like, doing regular exercise, having nutritious diet, 
indulging in sports activities, etc. or people can have unhealthy habits, like, smoking, 
drinking, etc. In both the cases the impact on health care cost can be non -significant 
and it can be passed on to the policyholder in terms of using habits as a rating factor 
in some fashion.  
 
6. Socio economic status:  With socio -economic class is related man y aspects that can 
affect health care cost and in turn premium, like, access to health care facilities, 
health consciousness, awareness towards fitness, etc.  
 
 
4. Using more and more rating factors results in dividing the whole health portfolio in finer 
group s. This leads to charging premium in line with the health care cost produced by various 
segment of insured. This is as per the Principle of Equity. It is fair and just to charge the 
premium as per the claims experience of the sub groups of portfolio.  
 
 Moreover, not having enough number of rating factors leads to charging average premium 
to the different sub groups. This assumes a specific business mix. In case the business mix 
assumption does not fructify, it may result in different performance of the por tfolio than 
assumed. The situation may exacerbate if one or more competitors start using more rating 
factors. As a result of this, those which are good risks (where insurer with more rating 
factors is charging lower premium) will go to them and bad risks ( where insurer with more 
rating factors is charging higher premium) will come to insurer who is charging average 
premium. This is known as adverse selection and may lead to spiral effect.  
 
5. The following are the challenges in introducing additional rating fa ctors:  
 
1. Data:  There may not be sufficient statistical evidence to prove that the factors 
mentioned above are actually the risk factors affecting the cost of health care. This 
may be due to the fact that data is not captured around all these factors. For 
example, if insurer is not capturing information in proposal form about the 
profession, eating habits, social economic status, etc. of the insured it may not be 
able to conclude whether these have any bearing on claim cost or not.  
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 10 
 2. Simplified Product:  Many p eople advocate keeping the health insurance products 
simple. If more rating factors are introduced then the premium table may look a bit 
more complicated and this may not be seen favourably, especially by customer -
facing teams, i.e., sales and marketing.  
 
3. Challenging Status quo:  Most often, when overall performance of the product is as 
expected in terms of volume and profitability, companies do not want to take risk of 
introducing additional rating factors. Maintaining status quo looks safest option 
unless some player comes in the fray with more refined risk pools with the help of 
additional rating factors. Then it becomes desirable for other insurers to follow the 
suit by having those additional rating factor in the product.  
 
4. Regulatory Restrictions:  Regula tor may not allow some of the rating factors if these 
are considered discriminatory against a particular class of society.  
 
5. Difficult to monitor:  It may be difficult to collect and process information around 
some of the rating factors. For example, insured  may have mix of healthy and 
unhealthy habits and these may keep on changing. It is not feasible to collect and 
keep latest information about such rating factors. Although in such cases some 
proxy can be found out, like gym membership, etc.  
 
6. Cost Implicati ons:  In case of some of the rating factors, the cost of collecting 
information may outweigh the benefits derived from using it. For example, insured 
may be subjected to some medical screening in order to ascertain his exact medical 
status because he/ she m ay not disclose the medical history accurately. In such 
cases, the cost of medical tests may be prohibitive, especially, if coverage is not very 
high and renewal rate is low.  
 
      
 [Total 20 M arks]  
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 11 
 Solution 5 : - 
 
Frequency Trend = 2%  
Severity Trend = 8 % 
Combined Trend = 1.02 X 1.08 – 1 = 10.16%        
 
Particulars  2010  2011  2012  
Mid of experience period (1)  01-07-2010  01-07-2011  01-07-2012  
        
Date of Filing (2)  01-04-2013  01-04-2013  01-04-2013  
Product Approval Date (3)  01-07-2013  01-07-2013  01-07-2013  
Product Launch Date (4)  01-10-2013  01-10-2013  01-10-2013  
Last date of policy issue with revised prices (5)  30-09-2016  30-09-2016  30-09-2016  
Effective date of last policy (6):        
 For policies with one year tenure (6a)   30-09-2017  30-09-2017 30-09-2017  
 For policies with two years tenure (6b)  30-09-2018  30-09-2018  30-09-2018  
        
Mid of Exposure period (7)        
 For policies with one year tenure (7a)   30-09-2015  30-09-2015  30-09-2015  
 For policies with two years tenure (7b)  31-03-2016 31-03-2016  31-03-2016  
        
Length of trend in years (8)        
 For policies with one year tenure (8a)                   5.25                  4.25                  3.25  
 For policies with two years tenure (8b)                  5.75                  4.75                  3.75  
        
Trend Factor to be applied (9)        
 For policies with one year tenure (9a)                   1.66                  1.51                  1.37  
 For policies with two years tenure (9b)                  1.75                  1.58                  1.44  
 
Notes and workings:  
(1) Middle of respective loss years.  
(2) Given in the question  
(3) (2) + 3 months  
(4) (3) + 3 months  
(5) (4) + 3 years  
(6) (5) + 1 year for one year policies and (5) + 2 years for two years policies  
(7) Middle of (4) and 6(a) or 6(b) as the case may be  
(8) (7) – (1) 
(9) {1+ 10.16% (combined trend)} raised to the power respective factors in (8)  
 
 For example trend factor for policies for one year duration to be applied on experience of 
2010 can be derived by formula 1.10165.25 = 1.66 
(Total  12 Marks)  
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 12 
 Solution 6 : - 
i. Following are the various segments of bank customers who can be sold health insurance 
products.  
 
1. Saving Bank Account Holder:  This is the major customer base for many banks in 
terms of count and can be tapped to sell healt h insurance products.  
 
2. Credit Card Holder:  This is another customer base which can be huge in number, 
especially, for some banks which are active in this space.  
 
3. Home Loan Customer:  Some banks are having huge portfolio of home loans. 
Generally, home loan c ustomers have long term relationship with banks and the 
same can be utilised to sell health insurance products.  
 
4. Other Loan Customer:  Banks provide loans for various purposes, like, car loan, 
personal loan, commercial loan, etc. This segment of bank custom er may also be 
interested in buying health insurance products.  
 
5. Deposit and Investment:  Some of the customers invest their surplus funds in bank 
deposit or invest through banks in other schemes, like, mutual funds, bonds, 
precious metals (gold/ silver), et c. These customers have investible surplus and may 
easily be inclined to invest in health insurance products.  
 
6. Current Account Holder:  Current account holders may vary from a small 
entrepreneur to big corporate customers. Their requirement of health care 
insurance products may also vary significantly. This segment cannot be ignored to 
sell both group and retail health insurance products.  
 
It is pertinent to note that the categories of customers are not mutually exclusive and there may be 
overlaps in the abo ve categories, i.e., one customer may appear in more than one category. For 
example, one person can have both saving account and credit card with same bank or one person 
may be having home and car loans and may also have made some investment through bank.  
Another important point is that we may have to further categorise customers in sub -categories by 
demographic and social factors like, age, income -band, occupation, etc. in order to meet their needs 
more appropriately.  
 
ii. As we have seen above the customer ba se of a bank varies very widely and, therefore, any 
product can be sold to them. In particular, the following products can be easy to sell through 
bancassurance channel:  
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 13 
 1. Retail Inpatient Health Indemnity Product:  This has a wide market and can be sold to 
any segment mentioned above. The most useful feature of this product is that it can 
be designed and customised for different customer segments, viz., for HNI the sum 
insured limits can be very high and peripheral benefits, like, PED coverage, 
maternity, pr e-post hospitalization cover, etc. can be doled out. For middle income 
segment it can be simple product with medium sum -insured and no freebies. For 
segment that may not be able to afford high premium, sub limits, co -pay and 
deductibles can be introduced.  
 
2. Critical Illness:  This is a product with relatively less premium and can be easily 
bundled with loans and credit card customers. The tenure and sum -insured of CI 
benefit can be dovetailed with that of outstanding loan to give extra protection to 
bank and relief to customer.  
 
3. Group Health Insurance:  This can be a good selling proposition for holder of current 
accounts to cover their employees. Since, the profile of corporate customers may 
vary to a great extent depending on size of company, industry, locati on, etc., the 
need for health insurance product for its employees may also vary. Group health 
policies can be customised to a great extent as per the requirements of the 
customers.  
 
4. Personal Accident:  This is a simple product, like Critical Illness (CI), w ith low 
premium and can be sold to any segment of customer, especially, those who have 
taken loans. Like CI its benefits and tenure can be adapted as per the customer’s 
requirements.  
 
5. Overseas Travel:  Those customers who approach bank for foreign exchange may be 
target buyer for this cover.  
 
6. Long Term Care:  Although this product is not available in India. If available, this can 
be marketed to the annuity holders and pensioners. Those who buy pension 
products may also be interested in this product.  
 
To sum up, it is important to identify the needs of different segment and sub -segment of the 
customers and offer them the health insurance solution which fulfils their needs completely.  
 
iii. The following are the main challenges of bancassurance channel:  
 
1. Strong bar gaining power:  Banks are very big entities and most often much bigger 
than size of insurance company. This puts them in strong position when it comes to 
negotiating for commercial considerations and other terms and conditions of 
agreement. Sometimes, this poses a challenge to come up with a mutually beneficial 
deal for insurance companies.  
 
IAI                                                                                                                                                 SA1 -0513  
Page 14 
 2. Concentration of business:  Overdependence on this channel and ignoring other 
channels may prove disastrous for insurance companies because of very high 
concentration. On ce a bank goes it takes away with it existing and potential 
customers which may have serious implication on both top -line and bottom -line of 
the insurance company.  
 
3. Meeting customer expectation:  It is important to note that in bancassurance 
arrangement ban ks and insurance companies share common customers. Sometimes, 
insurance companies may be compelled to relent to pressure by banks to honour 
claims even when this may not be strictly payable as per the terms and conditions of 
policy wording. This may be bec ause banks may not like to displease their important 
customers. Hence, quite often the expectation of customers of bancassurance 
channel is much more and difficult to meet.  
 
4. Promoter of own insurance company:  In most of the cases in India banks have 
floate d their own insurance companies or have stakes in some insurance companies. 
In such scenarios, banks would like to market and promote products on their own 
insurance companies and thus the scope of this channel is limited to other insurance 
companies. On t he other hand banks -floated insurance companies may not be very 
welcomed by other banks also. This restrictive practice may pose a challenge for the 
growth and development of bancassurance channel.  
 
5. Dual regulator:  Banks are regulated by RBI while insuranc e companies by IRDA. This 
may sometime pose difficulty for the relationship and bancassurance as a channel.  
 
6. Wide reach:  Banks generally have wide reach in terms of branch network and 
customer base. They have branches in far flung areas while insurance com panies 
may not have presence in those remote areas. This may pose challenge for 
insurance companies to serve the customers acquired through bancassurance 
channel. They may have to invest in developing operational capabilities and provider 
network in those remote areas to serve these customers which may not always be 
economical.  
 
(Total 18 Marks)  
 
 
 
 
**************************************  
