INSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA  
 
EXAMINATIONS  
 
 
05th November  2014 
Subject SA1 – Health and Care Insurance  
Time allowed: Three hours ( 14.45* - 18.00 Hrs)  
Total Marks: 100  
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES  
 
1. Please read the instructions on the front page of answer booklet and 
instructions to examinees sent along with hall ticket carefully and follow 
without exception . 
2. * You have 15 minutes at the start of the examination in which  you are 
required to read the questions. You are strongly encouraged to use th is 
time for reading only, but notes may be made. You then have three hours 
to complete the paper.  
3. You must not start writing your answers in the answer sheet until 
instructed to do so by the supervisor . 
4. The answers are expected to be India Specific application for the 
syllabus and corresponding core reading. However, substantially the core 
reading material is still taken from material supplied by Actuarial 
Education Company which are meant for UK Fellowsh ip examination. 
The core reading also contains some material which is India Specific, 
mostly the IRDA regulation. In view of this, it should be noted that focal 
point of answers is expected to be India Specific application. However , if 
application specific  to any other country is quoted in the answer the 
candidate  should answer the question with reference to Indian 
environment.  
5. Attempt all questions, beginning your answer to each question on a 
separate sheet.  
6. Mark allocations are shown in brackets.  
7. Please c heck if you have received complete Question Paper and no page 
is missing. If so, kindly get new set of Question Paper from the 
Invigilator.  
AT THE END OF THE EXAMINATION  
Please return your answer book and this question paper to the supervisor separately.  
    
IAI         SA1- 1014 
 Page 2 of 3     
Q. 1)  Discuss advantages and disadvantages of cashless system of claim settlements compared to 
reimbursement system of claims in India from both the insured and insurer’s perspective.    
[8] 
    
Q. 2)  Your insurance company has tie -up with a bank through which your company has been selling 
its flagship retail PMI product to Bank’s customers since last few years. Recently, the Bank has 
approached your company requesting for designing a voluntary customiz ed group policy      
(non-employer -employee) exclusively for its customers where premium will be paid by 
customers of the Bank.  
 
Two main changes (from the Retail PMI product) requested are waiting period waiver and 
increase in default age criteria of pre -acceptance medical check from age 46 to age 55          
(unless pre -existing diseases are disclosed in the proposal form, in those cases Medical test 
requirement triggers irrespective of age of applicant).  
  
 i) Discuss the fundamental differences between a corporate group policy                 
(employer -employee) and a customized group policy (non -employer -employee).   
(5) 
    
 ii) Discuss the risk factors that the company needs to consider before taking the final 
decision.   
(10) 
    
 iii) Explain ways in which company could address some or all of those risks.    (10) 
    
 iv) Do you expect that morbidity experience of the retail product pertaining to bank customers 
may differ from that of rest of the customers of the same retail product? If so, state the 
possible reasons.   
 
(3) 
    
 v) Outline the overall approach in deriving the final premium for the proposed group policy.  (8) 
   [36] 
    
Q. 3)  You are the consulting actuary specializing in the mergers and acquisitions of the health 
insurance companies.  
 
A specialized health insurance company “Care -Health” has been writing the Long Term Care 
insurance and Income Protection cover business for many years. This company has recently 
been put up for sale. A major health insurance company in the country “Care -All” has been 
invited to bid for the business of “Care -Health”. You have been assigned by “Care -All” as the 
consulting actuary for exploring the acquisition opportunities.  
  
 i) What are the possible reasons for the “Care -Health” to sell the business?  (4) 
    
 ii) Describe the information you would like to gather to place a value on the target business.  (8) 
    
 iii) Describe how you would value the business of “Care -Health” company.  (4) 
    
 iv) You have observed that as per the published information, assumptions used in Embedded 
Value calculations of “Care -Health” are very different than best estimate assumptions used 
by “Care -All” company. Suggest the possible reasons behind the differences between 
assumptions.   
 
 
(6) 
    
 v) Before submitting the bid, what other factors are to be considered.  (6) 
   [28] 
IAI         SA1- 1014 
 Page 3 of 3     
Q. 4)  A health insurer sells Group Critical Illness cover under compulsory employer -employee group. 
Under this cover, sum assured is [200 - (age + weight)] times the monthly basic salary of the 
employee.  
 
Whereas ‘age’ and ‘weight’ are the age and weight of the employees at the time of ince ption of 
the policy or at the time of policy renewal. Hence the sum assured would automatically change 
at each policy renewal.  
  
 i) Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of introducing the Group Critical Illness cover 
to this group.   
(6) 
    
 ii) Discuss how the company would underwrite this benefit and any potential pitfalls.  (8) 
    
 iii) How would your answer differ from i) and ii) above, if instead of Group Critical Illness 
cover, Private Medical Insurance cover is offered.   
(8) 
    
 iv) What would be the pricing impact if the Group Critical Illness cover is offered on 
voluntary basis and what additional risks are considered while pricing this plan?   
(6) 
   [28] 
  ***********************   
 
 
 
