1
(i)
Outline how a Critical Illness (CI) insurance product can meet the needs of a policyholder.
[5]
Country X is a large well-developed country. CI insurance products were first introduced in Country X 25 years ago. The CI insurance market in Country X has expanded significantly over the last 25 years with many health and care insurance companies now selling CI products. The main features of CI products in Country X have remained largely unchanged over the last 25 years, other than the number of CI conditions covered that has increased significantly.
Following a significant increase in the number of complaints from consumers, the regulator carried out an investigation of the CI insurance market in Country X. The regulator subsequently produced a report on the CI insurance market, which concluded that CI products:
 do not appear to be adequately meeting policyholders’ needs.
 do not appear to represent good value for consumers.
The following table provides an extract from the report.
2005 2010 2015 2020 2024 Number of CI claims paid out/number of CI claims received (%) 55 56 57 58 59 Maximum benefit paid out on CI policy (inflation adjusted to 2024 values) ($) 50,000 52,500 58,000 61,500 64,000 Total expected premiums paid over the lifetime on a CI policy/maximum possible benefits payable on the policy (for new business) 0.8 0.9 1 1.2 1.5 Time taken to pay CI claims (in days) 14 14 21 48 72 Number of CI conditions covered on a CI policy 10 15 30 60 100 Advisor commission on a CI policy ($) 240 350 700 1,400 2,400 All figures in the table above are averaged across all health and care insurance companies that sell CI insurance products in Country X.
Other information:
 Price inflation in Country X has been 4% p.a. for many years.
 CI premium rates have increased broadly in line with price inflation each year.
(ii)
Discuss the regulator’s concerns about CI products, taking into consideration the information provided in the table above.
[15]
Following the investigation into the CI market, the regulator has decided to introduce new consumer protection regulations referred to as ‘Consumer Responsibility’ regulations. The new regulations require that health and care products provide ‘good consumer outcomes’ and ‘fair value’ for the customer. Each health and care insurance company in Country X must determine what represents ‘good consumer outcomes’ and ‘fair value’ for their own customers.
Company A is a health and care insurance company that has sold CI business in Country X for many years. Company A has been considering its response to the new ‘Consumer Responsibility’ regulations on its business.
(iii)
Discuss how Company A could ensure its CI products provide ‘good consumer outcomes’ and ‘fair value’ to its customers.
[15]
The board of Company A has asked that monitoring is put in place to ensure Company A is complying with the new Consumer Responsibility regulations for its CI business.
(iv)
Describe the monitoring that Company A could carry out for its CI business to check it is complying with the new Consumer Responsibility regulations.
[5]
[Total 40]
2 Company ABC, a successful insurance company in Country A, writes income protection on a group basis. Company ABC has a significant share of the available market and is exploring growth opportunities.
One opportunity being considered is expansion to Country B.
(i)
Discuss the market research you would conduct to evaluate the potential opportunity.
[12]
Company XYZ, a local insurer in Country B, writes all categories of health business including income protection, critical illness and health insurance. Company XYZ has been identified as a potential acquisition target.
(ii)
Compare the relative merits of acquiring Company XYZ versus purchasing their book of income protection policies.
[8]
The finance director of Company ABC has proposed that alternative growth strategies are considered. Two strategies put forward are:
 Company XYZ to start selling individual income protection business  Company XYZ to start selling additional health and care insurance lines within Country A.
(iii)
Discuss the merits of each strategy.
[12]
[Total 32]
3 A large employer provides medical benefits to its staff via an in-house (self-insured)
scheme. The scheme has the following features:
 All staff are required to join the scheme.
 There is one set of benefits available and all staff receive the same benefits.
 The scheme covers all expenses related to doctor visits, hospital expenses and prescribed medication. Over the counter medication, physiotherapy and alternative medicine are not covered.
 The scheme has no upfront underwriting and there are no waiting periods for new staff joining the employer.
 The employer funds the cost of the scheme on behalf of the employees and the cost of these benefits is not reflected in the employee’s monthly salary.
 Family members can be added to the scheme at an additional cost per member.
This additional cost is paid for by the employee and deducted from the employee’s salary. Family members can only be added to the scheme when the employee joins the company or when specific events occur such as marriage or childbirth. No underwriting is applied to family members.
The employer is considering a proposal to close the scheme and instead, allow staff to choose a Private Medical Insurance (PMI) package from an established health and care insurance company. The employer has considered a number of PMI plans from different health and care insurance companies and has chosen Insurer Z.
Insurer Z provides two PMI plans and staff can choose which level of care they wish to purchase. The two PMI plans are:
Plan A This plan covers all medical expenses related to treatment when hospitalised. No cover is provided for outpatient or day-to-day expenses such as doctor visits and chronic medication.
Plan B This plan provides comprehensive cover for all doctor and hospital related expenses including prescribed medication. Additionally, cover for over the counter medication, physiotherapy, alternative medicine and dental and optical benefits is provided with various limits.
Deductibles apply to both plans. The customer can select increased deductibles in order to pay a reduced premium.
Family members can be added at any time, with an additional premium calculated per member. Moratorium underwriting applies to both the main member and any family members added to the plan.
The cost of the medical package will be reflected as a reduction in earnings as the employer will deduct premiums from payroll.
(i)
Suggest possible reasons why the employer may close the current in-house medical scheme.
[6]
(ii)
List the stakeholders that need to be considered by the employer when considering this proposal.
[4]
(iii)
Discuss the proposal from the perspective of the employer’s staff members.
[8]
(iv)
Suggest possible actions that the employer could take to limit any negative impact on its staff of the proposed changes to the staff medical arrangements.
[4]
The employer implemented the PMI package from Insurer Z and the new arrangements have been in place for several years. Following an economic downturn, the employer has set an objective to reduce the cost of the PMI package.
(v)
Discuss the issues that the employer should consider if it decides to reduce the cost of the PMI package.
[6]
[Total 28]
END OF PAPER