=== PAGE 15 ===
SAL-19: Analysis of experience Page 41

Lg

4) Chapter 19 Practice Questions

19.2

Exam style

ups

19.2

Exam style

o

19.3

Exam style

A proprietary life insurance company is about to review its underwriting procedures and premium
rates for its critical illness policies. ùù*

=]
Outline the possible courses of action open to the company if it emerged from the investigation
that the existing premium rates result in losses that, on average, have a present value equal to /
aw ee
Aalf an annual premium. {10
A proprietary long-term insurance company has written significant volumes of only conventional conventional
income protection business over the past few years. Fee
(i) Explain how income protection business meets the needs of customers. tcl force ô(13 a
ù_ù SO
(ii) Explain why the company will want to monitor the experience and profitability of this
business on an ongoing basis. [7 Le
(iii) Give, with reasons, suitable asset classes for the companyÆs investments. You should also
indicate, with reasons, the further information you would ideally have in order to refine
the asset mix. [12 a
{Total 32
An established life insurer markets its products through a direct sales force and through insurance
intermediaries. It is now reviewing the pricing of its unit-linked critical illness product. It is ot et

intending to investigate the withdrawal experience on the companyÆs current unit-linked critical
illness portfolio. The company started writing this business eight years ago. For the first five
years sales were good, but have been significantly lower over the last three years.

The critical illness benefits are paid on diagnosis of a wide variety of conditions, and the

expectation is that most policyholders will ultimately claim on the policy. A withdrawal benefitis xx.
available before the end of the term, but there are no death benefits. The company also sells a cL
traditional non-linked version of the contract, which pays benefits only on a small number of

æconditions, and gives no withdrawal benefits.

0) Describe how the withdrawal experience would be analysed, mentioning any problems
that may be encountered. . [8]
(ii) Discuss how the results of the analysis would be used to produce suitable withdrawal
assumptions for use in the re-pricing. [4] co
[Total 12]
The Actuarial Education Company ⌐ IFE: 2024 Examinations

669


=== PAGE 16 ===
Page 42 SA1-19; Analysis of experience

The solutions start on the next page so that you can
separate the questions and solutions.

⌐ IFE: 2024 Examinations The Actuarial Education Company

B7n


=== PAGE 17 ===
1486
rm

19
ee

possible actions:
Possible actions:

[ . Tighten underwriting (but this may increase costs and reduce marketability), ... i.
ulw Lx ùùùù
... or reduce underwriting (but this will almost certainly increase claim incidence rates). [4
hws . Tighten claims control (but this may increase costs), ... VA
ee ù=ù=ù
uo ... or relax the claims control (but this will increase allowed claims). vA
eas ░ Reduce expenses (often easier said than done). te
æ | ░ Introduce exclusions, eg AlDS-related conditions, but this may be unpopular and such
oxcee* exclusions may be unworkable, Ye
░ The loss may be occurring at particular ages / terms. This can be investigated using
wat cashflow analysis. vA
pea Nard hice Et
. Check experience to see that your premiums are accurate enough at different ages /
terms. %
roSXK ░ Examine the rating structure for heterogeneity. 4
vet ░ For example, if smokers and non-smokers are not distinguished, introduce non-smoker
discounts. wa
e | . Reinsure more, ... vA
Ae. ... but the reinsurer may require all or more of the premiums. |
Lew ░ Accept it as a æloss leaderÆ? vA
leader |e This may be difficult, as a loss of half a yearÆs premium is probably unacceptable. %
░ Increase premiums, ... %
wows ... but it may attract poorer risks and sell little good business. vA
are
\ . Decrease premiums to boost business and decrease per policy costs. This could be very
Naar entola

SA1-19: Analysis of experience Page 43

Chapter 19 Solutions

Make sure there are no hidden margins in the basis, je is the contract really unprofitable? ve

However, the company should not simply change the basis to æmakeÆ the contract profitable. [%

The rest of this answer assumes the premium rates really are unprofitable. There are various

risky when you are already making big losses.

. Introduce reviewable premiums and terms (ar, if reviewable already, make the reviews

more frequent). Ye
. This allows the company to respond to changes in experience, reducing capital

agows th PESPONG EO GHAnE

requirements. w

. However, it will be more difficult to ensure that treating customers fairly requirements
ù

are met and it may be unpopular with customers and sellers. %

The Actuarial Education Company IFE; 2024 Examinations

671


=== PAGE 18 ===
%

19.2 (i) How income protection (IP) meets the needs of customers
IP provides the insured with an income during periods of short or long-term disability, sickness or
accident (referred to as incapacity). 4
Its function is to replace part of the income lost as a result of the incapacity. Ye.
The income lost would also be a major problem for any dependants the insured may have,
eg children and spouse. Ñ
The insured can claim any number of times during the term of the policy, subject to the policy
conditions. Ye
<~on individual contracts, premiums are unlikely to increase with age, ... A
. but may increase with inflation and may be reviewable depending on experience. 4
There are, however, limitations on the benefits, ... %
.. for example in the form of deferred periods, and in the definition of disability. vA

C The customers of an insurer include employers.

Page 44 SA1-19: Analysis of experience
Pi

░ Pull out of that market, ... %

-. but it may experience pressure from agents to reintroduce the contract, especially if
you have a direct salesforce. %
[Maximum 10

The product may also be used to cover loan repayments {including the vehicle used to repay the
loan). ? Ys

Unemployment may also be a covered peril. A

The benefits from an IP policy may also be used to cover insurance premium payments on other

insurance policies, eg pension contributions. A
ey
Locum Protection Insurance is another form of IP. Ye

This is where professionals (eg a group of doctors in one practice) use the benefits to pay for
temporary employment of a replacement for one of their colleagues in the event of that
colleagueÆs incapacity. W.

Group versions of IP policies are available for purchase by employers. %
ù

For employees unable to work, the employer will at least have to pay statutory sickness benefi
It may also have to pay for a replacement employee.

IP policies will protect against some of this loss and they encourage a return to work and so may
help to minimise these costs. . ve

The employer also has a morai obligation to keep its workforce happy. IP is a benefit often valued
by the workforce, which may also encourage staff to work for, and remain with, the company. (1.
ù ù½ôô

⌐ IFE: 2024 Examinations The Actuarial Education Company

aT7>


=== PAGE 19 ===
SA1-19: Analysis of experience Page 45

It is particularly keen to keep the senior key staff happy, as they will be more valuable to the
companyÆs future, and are more difficult to replace. %

IP policies will provide disability income and will also encourage a return to work via the use of
benefits limited to a proportion of pre-disability income. we

IP products may provide a partial benefit to those who return to work on a part-time basis or in a
less strenuous role. 4

This will benefit the employer (by encouraging a return to work) and the employee (by helping
with their recovery}. Ky

The employer may also get a tax advantage of providing IP benefits. Ws.

Premiums paid by the employer qualify for tax relief, and the benefits are treated as a business
expense. Ye

The aim for the employer will be an overall cost outgo less than the benefits provided (both
tangible and perceived) to all the employees. ws

The employer will not want the administration of the IP policies to be a burden. The assessment
of claims and the provision of benefits needs to be straightforward. vA

Subject to keeping all levels of staff happy, the employer wants the benefits to employees to be as
consistent as possible and so be seen to be fair. vA

This would mean offering the policies to all staff, and perhaps offering a benefit consistent with
salary. %

The customers of an insurer include the sales staff.

The distributors of the contracts will need policies that are well-designed to meet customersÆ

needs and with clear policy wording. 4
This is important since IP policies can often be complex. VA
as ùù

A popular product will encourage cross-selling, since the sales staff would be more willing to
promote other products from the same company. vA

The premiums and benefits should be competitive and good value for money, to ensure
marketability. My

The product should be reasonably flexible, giving the desired benefits. The policy could be
packaged with other benefits such as PMI.

The remuneration terms (eg commission) shauld be satisfactory to both the distributors and the

company. w

The underwriting and claims process should be reasonably straightforward, not too onerous and
fair to all parties so that the distributor can offer good service. ian
ie PEcoeeemic

The Actuarial Education Company @ IFE: 2024 Examinations

673


=== PAGE 20 ===
Page 46 SA1-19: Analysis of experience

Any sales regulations requirements should be met by the productÆs design and packaging. For
example, any literature should conform to guidelines. K
7 [Maximum 13.

(i) Why monitor? Lp Gaerenovs ,

Given that there are substantial volumes of business the company needs to be aware of how the

business is performing. ws
This is so that it can spot possible trends in order to take early action. A
eee ùù_ùù_ù

The key reason for monitoring is to identify divergences in actual experience from that which was

assumed in the contract pricing, as part of the actuarial control cycle for the business. 1
4 Pe

. QQ *| The company is particularly interested in whether the contract is proving as profitable as expected

wood Rot

.. and is giving shareholders an acceptable return on their capital. %

Ag If nat, the company can consider what it needs to change fore existing business (to the extent it

Bi4 can) and for hew business. al
et On its in-force IP business it might be able to improve its claims underwriting if that is found to be
kee a problem. %
There is little it can do on pricing if terms are guaranteed. vA

Q ù-| Either way, the company can revise assumptions in its embedded value calculations, to maintain
an accurate view of the worth of the business and to recognise profits (and losses) appropriately.

1
MG ô+ If the existing contracts are reviewable, then the results can be used to change either the
premiums or the benefits given. 4
ae Se
However, the scope to do this will to an extent be limited by competitive forces and the need to
treat customers fairly. Tee A
e B =
Aad ô| For new business it will want to use the results of monitoring to help it re- price, where | this is
ùùù ùù.

shown to be necessary.

ù
The information gained can be used to revise assumptions and produce new premiums, 4.
ùù eee ùù

By monitoring business volumes and mix the company can also gain some information on the
marketability and competitiveness of the product by sector. %

Monitoring mix is especially important if (as is Tikely) there is cross-subsidy between policies, [4
ù ùùùù. Sak

Pa: company also needs to moniter aspects of experience such as claim inceptions and
* terminations, expenses and} persistency in order to check the appropriateness of supervisory

+ ee

valuation assumptions and any regulatory reporting. 1
[Maximum 7.
⌐ IFE: 2024 Examinations The Actuarial Education Company

B7A


=== PAGE 21 ===
$A1-19: Analysis of experience Page 47

(iii) Suitable assets
⌐ { The company should invest so as to maximise return, subject to acceptable risk. [%.
eee eS.

The benefit payments from the IP policies may consist of non-increasing benefits, or, perhaps
more likely (particularly for group benefits), benefits that increase in line with salary inflation
{perhaps limited to an absolute amount}. [1

We therefore require further information about the mix of business and how benefits increase, ...

... both during the policy term and during claim payment. A

Expenses can also be considered to increase in line with an index, again perhaps salary inflation.

Premiums will normally be level, but again may increase over time in accordance with the

contract wording. These can be netted off the increasing benefit where applicable. (1.
Again, more information on premiums will be needed fram the company. 4

Assets should be in the same currency as that of the liabilitie
the policies cover overseas policyholders or employees. %

We need to know whether any of

If there are liabilities in other countries, these could be matched with overseas investments. we
BL SOUNNES, Rene

ù
For the benefits guaranteed in money terms, a mixture of suitable short-term investments would }ó
ùùù ùùù

a suitable match. 4
For example, a variety of fixed-interest bonds and cash, 4

For the increasing benefits, assets that increase similarly, such as index-linked gilts, would be
itable. vA
sui z

An alternative would be other assets expected to give a real return, such as equities or property,
%.

... although the volatility and marketability of these would need to be taken into account. %.

We should therefore like to know the size of the insurer, and its level of investment expertise to
see whether these alternatives would suit. ve

Asmall company with minimal expertise would probably not want a large proportion of volatile
| assets. _ VA

The size of the insurerÆs free surplus will also have a big influence on the desirability of more risky

ù_ù_ù,
assets, ... ws

.. since a well-financed company could afford a more mismatched and risky investment approach.

The Actuarial Education Company ⌐ IFE: 2024 Examinations

675


=== PAGE 22 ===
Page 48 SA1-19: Analysis of experience

As the company is a proprietary one, tt has a duty to its shareholders to sustain and enhance the
return it achieves on its assets backing the free surplus. This would imply some investment in

7 equities and property. {1
We should also like to know what legislative restrictions there are on the investments we can
make, vs

As the company is growing rapidly, provided it remains solvent, it can use incoming premiums to

pay claims. 4

euch lLUS

However, future premium income is not guaranteed and so caution should be exercised. we
Se coun s)

We should like to know the recent claims experience of the insurer. If the outgo is highly variable,
amore lore cautious approach should be taken, retaining a high proportion ion of liquid assets. [1

- Also, the extent of guarantees should be known, as a large proportion of guaranteed business
may make net net outgo more volatile. 4

A
Short-dated gilts and cash could be held to back the capital requirements. This would reduce the

exposure to market risk and which may limit the size of any solvency capital requirement. (1
The need to minimise capital requirements is less ess important to a company with a large free
Utne CSR Iai pel Sela
surplus, so we should like to know the size of the capital requirement in comparison to the size of
the free surplus. vA
es sure

Kore We also need to know the tax position of the company, since this will also influence the asset mix.
ù ùs

BOA | The results of any ALM exercise would be useful. Me
psittaci
[Maximum 12░

19.3 {i) Analysing experience

yet A key variable in the analysis is duration in fork. 4
a ô

The insurer would calculate the numbers of policies still in force at each duration as a percentage
of policies originally written in the group. [%

a
Ee It would have considerably more data for shorter durations in force than for longer ones. w
6 It would have no data for durations above eight years. a Ys.

z

However, longer durations are of less concern because it is usually easier to set withdrawal terms

+ to produce an acceptable overall profit. 4
wT

ws The insurer might consider older types of health products to give longer-duration data, but this

ee | may nat be appropriate for the current type of contract. :
ùù ee
+ Cm In particular, the non-linked version of the product may give an indication of withdrawal rates. [4
ùùùù
ax |

⌐ IFE: 2024 Examinations The Actuarial Education Company

BR


=== PAGE 23 ===
non ░ payment method ░? 4]

SA1-19: Analysis of experience Page 49

However, the experience is likely to differ dramatically due to:
 EXPETIENCE IS likely to aul aes

░ no withdrawal benefit being paid %)
░ different definitions of allowable claims. ~~ Ñ]
ù ù

r DE Lt

One problem is that, because of the falling volumes, the bulk of the shorter duration data is from
many years ago and may no longer be relevant. %)

It would want to analyse the direct sales force and insurance intermediary data separately. %]

Other possible classifications include:

. premium frequency ùù va)
. original term of contract ôa
░ size of benefit A]
. gender 4)
░ age 4)
{2% ùù occupation. Vl
(However, there is unlikely to be sufficient data to split the data by all these factors. VA

The insurer might also wish to study trends. Again the volume of data may be a problem,

especially for recent years. VAI
Reinsurers and consultancies may be able to help with general trends. Kal
ô A)

Alternatively, there may be industry-wide data available, although this is unlikely.

Any such trends would have to be interpreted carefully, because they may have been affected by:
one eee PESIL Semee SY

changes in economic conditions, including investment performance Kal
publicity for critical illness contracts A]
changes in the generosity of the withdrawal benefit KAI
changes in competition. 4

[Maximum 8]

(ii} Re-pricing

The results of the analysis would have to be used with great care, and may need considerable

adjustment to be suitable for current conditions. fy
░
In particular, allowance would need to be made for the factars mentioned above (economic
a ene gcse
conditions, publicity, etc). [4}

The company would have to take account of its expectations for the future in adjusting the past
data. [A]

The Actuarial Education Company ⌐ IFE: 2024 Examinations

677


